Bacteriological water analysis is a method of analysing water to estimate the numbers of bacteria present and, if needed, to find out what sort of bacteria they are. It is a microbiological analytical procedure which uses samples of water and from these samples determines the concentration of bacteria. It is then possible to draw inferences about the suitability of the water for use from these concentrations. This process is used, for example, to routinely confirm that water is safe for human consumption or that bathing and recreational waters are safe to use.
The interpretation and the action trigger levels for different waters vary depending on the use made of the water. Very stringent levels applying to drinking water whilst more relaxed levels apply to marine bathing waters where much lower volumes of water are expected to be ingested by users.
The common feature of all these routine screening procedures is that the primary analysis is for indicator organisms rather than the pathogens that might cause concern. Indicator organisms are bacteria such as non-specific coliforms, Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa that are very commonly found in the human or animal gut and which, if detected, may suggest the presence of sewage. Indicator organisms are used because even when a person is infected with a more pathogenic bacteria, they will still be excreting many millions times more indicator organisms than pathogens. It is therefore reasonable to surmise that if indicator organism levels are low, then pathogen levels will be very much lower or absent. Judgements as to suitability of water for use are based on very extensive precedents and relate to the probability of any sample population of bacteria being able to be infective at a reasonable statistical level of confidence.
Analysis is usually performed using culture, biochemical and sometimes optical methods. When indicator organisms levels exceed pre-set triggers, specific analysis for pathogens may then be undertaken and these can be quickly detected (where suspected) using specific culture methods or molecular biology.
Because the analysis is always based on a very small sample taken from a very large volume of water, all methods rely on statistical principles.
One of the oldest methods is called the multiple tube method. In this method a measured sub-sample (perhaps 10ml) is diluted with 100ml of sterile growth medium and an aliquot of 10ml is then decanted into each of ten tubes. The remaining 10ml is then diluted again and the process repeated. At the end of 5 dilutions this produces 50 tubes covering the dilution range of 1:10 through to 1: 10000.
The tubes are then incubated at a pre-set temperature for a specified time and at the end of the process the number of tubes with growth in is counted for each dilution. Statistical tables are then used to derive the concentration of organisms in the original sample. This method can be enhanced by using indicator medium which changes colour when acid forming species are present and by including a tiny inverted tube in each sample tube. This inverted tube catches any gas produced. The production of gas at 37 Deg Celsius is a strong indication of the presence of Escherichia coli
An ATP test is the process of rapidly measuring active microorganisms in water through detection of a molecule called Adenosine Triphosphate, or ATP.
ATP is a molecule found only in and around living cells, and as such it gives a direct measure of biological concentration and health. ATP is quantified by measuring the light produced through its reaction with the naturally-occurring firefly enzyme Luciferase using a Luminometer. The amount of light produced is directly proportional to the amount of biological energy present in the sample.
2nd Generation ATP tests are specifically designed for water, wastewater and industrial applications where, for the most part, samples contain a variety of components that can interfere with the ATP assay.
The plate count method relies on bacteria growing a colony on a nutrient medium so that the colony becomes visible to the naked eye and the number of colonies on a plate can be counted. To be effective, the dilution of the original sample must be arranged so that on average between 10 and 100 colonies of the target bacterium are grown. Fewer than 10 colonies makes the interpretation statistically unsound whilst greater than 100 colonies often results in overlapping colonies and imprecision in the count. To ensure that an appropriate number of colonies will be generated several dilutions are normally cultured.
The laboratory procedure involves making serial dilutions of the sample (1:10, 1:100, 1:1000 etc.) in sterile water and cultivating these on nutrient agar in a dish that is sealed and incubated. Typical media include Plate count agar for a general count or MacConkey agar to count gram-negative bacteria such as E. coli. Typically one set of plates is incubated at 22°C and for 24 hours and a second set at 37°C for 24 hours. The composition of the nutrient usually includes reagents that resist the growth of non-target organisms and make the target organism easily identified, often by a colour change in the medium. Some recent methods include a fluorescent agent so that counting of the colonies can be automated. At the end of the incubation period the colonies are counted by eye, a procedure that takes a few moments and does not require a microscope as the colonies are typically a few millimetres across.
Most modern laboratories use a refinement of total plate count in which serial dilutions of the sample are vacuum filtered through purpose made membrane filters and these filters are themselves laid on nutrient medium within sealed plates. The methodology is otherwise similar to conventional total plate counts. Membranes have a printed millimetre grid printed on and can be reliably count a much greater number of colonies under a binocular microscope.
When the analysis is looking for bacterial species that grow poorly in air, the initial analysis is done by mixing serial dilutions of the sample in liquid nutrient agar which is then poured into bottles which are then sealed and laid on their sides to produce a sloping agar surface. Colonies that develop in the body of the medium can be counted by eye after incubation.
The total number of colonies is referred to as the Total Viable Count (TVC). The unit of measurement is cfu/ml (or colony forming units per millilitre) and relates to the original sample. Calculation of this is a multiple of the counted number of colonies multiplied by the dilution used.
When samples show elevated levels of indicator bacteria, further analysis is often undertaken to look for specific pathogenic bacteria. Species commonly investigated in the temperate zone include Salmonella typhi and Salmonella typhimurium
Depending on the likely source of contamination investigation may also extend to organisms such as Cryptosporidium spp.
In tropical areas analysis of Vibrio cholerae is also routinely undertaken.
MacConkey agar is culture medium designed to grow Gram-negative bacteria and stain them for lactose fermentation. It contains bile salts (to inhibit most Gram-positive bacteria), crystal violet dye (which also inhibits certain Gram-positive bacteria), neutral red dye (which stains microbes fermenting lactose), lactose and peptone. Alfred Theodore MacConkey developed it while working as a bacteriologist for the Royal Commission on Sewage Disposal in the United Kingdom.
ENDO medium contains peptone, lactose, dipotassium phosphate, agar, sodium sulfite, basic fuchsin and was originally developed for the isolation of Salmonella typhi, but is now commonly used in water analysis. As in MacConkey agar, coliform organisms ferment the lactose, and the colonies become red. Non-lactose-fermenting organisms produce clear, colourless colonies against the faint pink background of the medium.
mFC medium is a medium used in membrane filtration which contains selective and differential agents. These include Rosolic acid to inhibit bacterial growth in general, except for faecal coliforms, Bile salts inhibit non-enteric bacteria and Aniline blue indicates the ability of faecal coliforms to ferment lactose to acid that causes a pH change in the medium.
TYEA medium contains tryptone, yeast extract, common salt and L-arabinose per liter of glass distilledwater and is a non selective medium usually cultivated at two temperatures (22 and 36°C) to determine a general level of contamination (a.k.a colony count).

Bearing A Hourglass is a fantasy novel by Piers Anthony. It is the second of eight books in the Incarnations of Immortality series.
Norton accepts the position of incarnation of Time and continues his life living backwards in time.
Some time in the future (as evidenced by technology in use that is much more advanced than in the first story), Norton—a man of about forty—is living a life of nomadic wandering when a ghost named Gawain asks him to father a child to his widow, Orlene, with whom Norton eventually falls in love. Gawain then asks Gaea, the Incarnation of Nature, to make the child in his own likeness so his bloodline would continue. Unfortunately, the child ends up dead due to a disease that runs in Gawain's family. Orlene then commits suicide.
Feeling depressed about the disastrous results of his affair with Orlene, Norton is approached by Gawain again, who offers Norton the position of Time (Chronos), where he must rule over all Earthly aspects of time. Gawain explains to Norton that Chronos lives backwards in time until the moment of the birth--or conception, it is never made clear--of the office holder's previous self, who is still living forwards. The ghost baits Norton, explaining to him that, by living backwards, he can continue to see Orlene, since she is still alive in the past. Norton accepts, and Gawain leads him to the spot where the future office holder of Time, Norton's predecessor, will pass the hourglass onto Norton.
Norton immediately starts literally living life backwards in time, though he can temporarily go forward in order to interact with others. However, when he is living backwards, he is not visible to mortals. Norton experiments with his hourglass, recognized by all the Incarnations as being the most powerful magical device in the world, to halt and/or reverse time, travel many millions of years into the Earth's past, and work with the Incarnation of Fate, who needs his hourglass to help fix tangles in her threads of fate.
Because Norton lives backwards in time, his past is everyone else's future, making him an isolated character even among the other Incarnations. He also realises that this will make it impossible to have a relationship with the forward-living Orlene. He does, however, have an affair with Clotho, the youngest aspect of Fate. This is both awkward and intriguing to Norton since her past is his future.
Residing at his new residence in Purgatory, Norton is then visited by Satan, who informs Norton that while he can travel anywhere in time with his hourglass, he cannot leave Earth. Satan claims to have the power to travel the whole universe, since evil permeates all of reality, and gives Norton some samples of this ability by having him travel to other planets where, Satan claims, time flows backwards, allowing Norton to live normally and to get involved in both a space opera ("Bat Durston and the BEMS") and an epic fantasy adventure. Satan offers Norton the ability to have that power if Norton will grant Satan a favor; to go back in time 20 years and save a man from committing suicide.
Norton goes back in time to check out this young man, but after consulting with the other Incarnations, he is informed that this man is the current office holder of the Incarnation of Death (Thanatos—in other words, Zane, from the previous novel) and that it is Zane's attempted suicide that brought him to that position. This man is needed as Thanatos in order to protect his girlfriend, Luna Kaftan, from Satan's mischief so she can go into politics and fulfill a prophecy of thwarting Satan.
However, a relic Satan had given Norton turned out to be a demon in disguise. When Norton went back in time, the demon disembarked a few years in the past to prevent Luna from going into politics (the demon gives an incumbent politician an antidote to keep him alive so Luna doesn't take his place). Due to some of the limitations of the hourglass, intercepting this demon is difficult, but Norton eventually manages to stop it.
Not giving up, Satan tries one more time by trapping Norton on one of the other planets he had an adventure on. Not sure how to get back home, Norton starts toying with the hourglass, traveling all the way back to the beginning of the observable universe and all the way to its end (from the big bang to the point where all matter became trapped in black holes) and realizes that, since the Incarnations' magic does not extend beyond Earth, his adventures on other planets were illusions created by Satan, and that Norton had, in fact, never left Earth.
Norton then finds out that the demon that created the illusion had been attached to him and, once again, disembarked at a point in the past, two years after the events of the first book, to begin a campaign to discredit Luna so she doesn't run for office. Norton then goes back in time to this point and uses his hourglass to show the world all the bad things that will happen if Luna doesn't get elected. As Norton is no longer fooled by Satan's illusions, Satan stops trying to exploit him.
Time's hourglass is recognized as the most powerful single item any Incarnation possesses, and it is all Chronos needs. It has an incredibly large variety of functions, all controlled by Time's will. It can move Chronos forward or backward in time, reverse his personal time to allow him to interact with others, and pause time for himself or his local area (which is not a true stasis, as most of the world continues as normal. How this syncs up is never explained, it is simply magic). He can reverse time temporarily in an area, which simply rewinds a scene without the mortal participants being aware of it, which allows him to choose another course for it. He can also choose to put the entire world into stasis, or even reverse time for the entire world, which he is forced to do at one point. In addition, Time's hourglass is also his method of travel. By selectively moving himself slightly out of sync with the Earth's rotation and orbit as he travels in time, he can use it to travel in space. This travel is, of course, failsafed to not allow him to end up in deep space or inside a wall or the earth itself. Time's Hourglass cannot be broken or lost, as any attempt to leave it behind will simply cause it to float at the same relative distance it was released. It can, however, be folded up for easy storage, though it still functions just as well.
Much like the other Incarnations, Time's Robe protects him from any kind of physical harm. Like the other incarnations, he is immortal and cannot be killed before it is time to pass on the office. Anything attempting to attack him would be immediately aged into oblivion upon contact. His robe is also the default area for his personal time flow, though he can of course expand it to bring other things along with him when he travels.
While not an official device of Time, Sning is a valuable companion to Norton throughout his career. A demonic, though benign, creature, it takes the form of a ring in the shape of a snake (where it gets the name Norton gave it, standing for SNake rING). While not omnipotent, Sning has an incredible amount of information, and appears to be able to learn many things about creatures just by touching them. It can respond to any question asked of it by squeezing the wearer's finger - one squeeze for yes, two for no, three for uncertainty, complex answers, or inability to answer (for example, if the asker foolishly poses a non yes/no question). It can also answer with squeezes representing a number, though Sning is actually quite bad at math, much to its embarrassment. In addition, it is capable of coming alive briefly, scouting an area, and reporting back. While alive, it is approximately six inches long, though it is shown that he can grow, and also poisonous. Its poison is strong enough to make a creature the size of a man sick for several hours, but not to kill. 
Sning has a long and complex history, originally belonging to Mym, the prince fated to become the Incarnation of War. He later gave it to Orb, the eventual Incarnation of Nature, when they were forced to part, who gave it to her daughter Orlene, the eventual Incarnation of Good. She eventually bestowed it to Norton as a gift. Despite being in the possession of four major incarnations, Sning was actually only named by Norton and he was the only one to use him during his actual time as an Incarnation.
Time, because of his nature, is the only Incarnation that is actually required to pass along his office at an exact schedule. Though time can travel to any period, he cannot actually interact with the world outside the span of his own lifetime. Thus, as he lives backwards, when his lifetime is up he must pass on the office to an heir. Though he has some ability to plan the transfer, the exact timing and the fact that he lives backwards means he has very little ability to actually enact it. He is forced to simply leave the Hourglass and hope whoever he has set up to take it does so. The Hourglass will entice those around it to pick it up, for there must be an Incarnation of Time, but it does not always go smoothly. There is one instance mentioned where the proposed new officeholder refused the position, and it fell to a nearby seven-year-old boy who happened to pick up the Hourglass. Again, though the position would appear to be gender neutral, it is traditionally held by a male.
Time is responsible for scheduling all human events to make sure everything runs smoothly, and the natural laws like cause and effect are honored. He works most closely with Fate, helping her to fix crossed threads, caused by human error or simply random chance. He also schedules notable births and deaths, important events in people's lives and in history, and makes sure the flow of time remains stable when it is bent, as it is by his allowance that the other Incarnations are also capable of local timestops. He is also responsible for guaranteeing that the course of history flows as it should. As Time, he is immune to paradox, and to the possibility of multiple futures. Should actions occur to change the course of the future, his memories will change with it. However, typically his original memories are accepted as the desirable ones, as one of his major tasks is to make sure it does not get changed around without adequate reason. This is, of course, why he lives backwards - he would be unable to properly deal with making the future happen as planned if he was unaware of the plan.
Jackie Cassada in the Library Journal review says that "Amid weight and often convoluted speculations about the nature of good and evil, time and space, and magic and science, Anthony's irrepressible humor asserts itself in unexpected ways. Far from being grim - or even allegorical-this sequel to On a Pale Horse will appeal to Anthony's large readership."
Bodufenvalhuge Sidi or Assayyidhu Bodufenvalhugey Seedhee (1888 - 1970), was a much-celebrated Maldivian intellectual and writer.
Bodufenvalhuge Sidi, born on 19 May 1888 as Hussain el-Hussaini, was Bodufenvalhuge Don Manike and Mohamed Kuda Sidi’s son.
He was a poet and also one time chief justice.
He married eight ladies and had five surviving children, from four of these marriages. His first wife was Bodugalhuge Aysha Didi, daughter of Bodugaluge Lhatuttu Didi. 
Among his descendants are Ahmed Mujuthaba and Mohamed Mustafa, who are both prominent in Maldivian administration and politics.
Bodufenvalhuge Sidi spent several years of his youth in Addu Atoll with his maternal relatives. Addu Atoll was the main centre of learning in the Maldives at that time, the turn of the century. He was educated there by a well-known master and relative, Elhageì Abdullahi Didi son of Ganduvaru Hasan Didi also known as Don Beyya of Meedhu.
Bodufenvalhuge Sidi was credited with many of the developments in Maldivian poetry in the20th century. He was the last major poet to write in the Maldivian poetic style called raivaru and one of the first poets to write in the style called lhen. Bodufenvalhuge Sidi's early poems were mainly political satire. 
In 1925, an attempt was made to depose Sultan Mohamed Shamsuddin III in favour of Prince Abdulla Imaduddin, son of the deposed King Siri Kula Sundhura Katthiri Bavana (Sultan Mohamed Imaduddine VI). The deposed king was exiled in Egypt while Abdulla Imaduddine was on a visit to Male' from Egypt. The attempt was foiled in February 1925 and Abdulla Imaduddine was deported to Egypt. The other conspirators were banished to various atolls of the Maldives.
Bodufenvalhuge Sidi, the most well-educated and widely respected of the conspirators, was accused of masterminding the plot. He denied the charge and claimed that he advised strongly against the timing and the modus operandi in the plot.
Bodufenvalhuge Sidi engaged in hunger strike and refused to answer any questions saying that he had done nothing wrong. After he had agreed to take his food, he insisted that it nust be delivered from his residence. He was successful in having this wish granted and at every meal time his brother-in-law Beruge Yoosuf Fulhu turned up with his meals and waited there while he ate. Bodufenvalhuge Sidi was implying that he did not trust the Maldivian authorities.
Usually the authorities meted out summary justice in cases such as that. The victim would be taken outside and given a good flogging with a cat-o-nine-tails until he was covered in blood, then lonumirus (chilli paste) would be applied to his wounds and he would be banished to a remote island.
In Bodufenvalhuge Sidi's case they were reluctant to do so because the British had become aware of the situation. The Maldives was then a British Protectorate even though the British were bund by a treaty not to interfere in the internal affairs of the Maldives.
Bodufenvalhuge Sidi was banished to Hulhudheli in a southern atoll. Many of hismaternal relatives from Addu Atoll regularly stopped at that island for provisions and water on their way to and from Male'. The authorities then became suspicious and decided to send him to Maamakunudhu, the remotest of the northern islands. 
In exile in Maamakunudu Island, Sidi continued to pursue his literary work and wrote much of his poetry. It was there that he adopted his pen name of "Himaarul Qowm" or "Donkey of the Nation".
He distributed his poetry, then banned by the government, to his associates in Male' through an ex-wife of his, Maavaa Kileygefaanu Ganduvaru Goma, and his sister Bodufenvalhuge Don Didi.
Bodufenvalhuge Sidi remained on Maamakunudu Island for eight years until he was pardoned in a general amnesty following the forced abdication of King Shamsuddin. Upon arrival in Male he was appointed Chief Justice. He was also appointed to the Council of Regency that ruled in the absence of a sultan.
After Bodufenvalhuge Sidi returned to Male', he continued to write poetry and a few novelsand other books. He was the last known person with a working knowledge of the older Maldive script called Dhives Akuru.
As-Sayyid Bodufenvalhuge Sidi was one of the very few Maldivian people of modern times who understood the now-forgotten ancient Divehi letters in which parts of royal grants, warrants and deeds were written. He learnt this ancient Dhivehi writing systems in Addu Atoll. Until early in the twentieth century, all government correspondence to and from Addu Atoll was written using these ancient Divehi letters.
Apart from a stint in politics as the Minister of Education, Bodufenvalhuge Sidi remained in the legal/ecclesiastical professions. His literary work gradually became less radical and moreconventional with age.
Bodufenvalhuge Sidi died in Male' on 2 June 1970.
Best known among his novels were Dillygey Ibrahim Didi ge Vaahaka, and Maa Makunudu Bodu Isa ge Vaahaka. He also published a treatise on Maldive poetry called Divehi Lhen Hedumuge Masaikaiyterikamuge Ran Taraadu.
In 1959, during Sultan Mohammed Farid’s reign, former Prime Minister (and later President) Ibrahim Nasir expressed a wish to have a book written about the former Maldivian script which by that time was largely ignored by Maldivians. Thus, he contacted As-Sayyid Bodufenvalhuge Sidi who swiftly obliged and wrote Dhivehi Akuru. By means of this small book Bodufenvalhuge Sidi (1888-1970) wanted to clearly show the fact that in ancient times Maldivians were writing from left to right in their own script. Hence ‘DIVEHI AKURU’ is perhaps the only book ever written in Tāna that opens from the left side.
The last chapter of this book shows a text where the Divehi Akuru are coming along with Arabic script. As the reader acquainted with Maldivian writing can see, this book is Volume 1 (evvana bai). Perhaps Bodufenvalhuge Sidi had the intention of publishing a second, or perhaps even a third volume on the subject. But unfortunately this important Maldivian learned man died before being able to do so.
Even though H.C.P. Bell did a very careful and thorough research on the Maldivian documents, Prime Minister Ibrahim Nasir’s intention was to have a book on the ancient script of the Maldives written by a Maldivian. Prime Minister Nasir's request to Bodufenvalhuge Sidi was done in order to clarify H.C.P. Bell’s misinterpretations, no matter how few. A staunch Maldivian nationalist, Nasir took this issue as a matter of national pride.
Present day members of Maldivian cultural institutions are aware of the lacunae in Bell's research and of Bodufenvalhuge Sidi's valuable contribution to mend matters, but little has been done to correct those inaccuracies. Still, H.C.P. Bell’s broad and valuable contributions to the study of the Maldivian language and scripts should not be underestimated.

James David Caldwell, Jr., or Buddy Caldwell (born May 20, 1946), is the Democratic attorney general of the U.S. state of Louisiana. Prior to serving as attorney general, Caldwell was the district attorney for Madison, East Carroll, and Tensas parishes from 1979 to 2008. Caldwell, who resides in Tallulah, the seat of Madison Parish, is also an entertainer, guitarist, and songwriter known for his impersonation of Elvis Presley.
In 2007, Caldwell ran for attorney general against the incumbent, fellow Democrat Charles F. Foti, Jr., of New Orleans, and Republican Royal Alexander (born 1966), an attorney from Shreveport and a former congressional aide to U.S. Representative Rodney Alexander (no relation) of Jackson Parish. Caldwell secured high-profile endorsements from the Louisiana Sheriffs' Association and the Louisiana Federation of Teachers, two longtime Democratic-leaning interest groups. Most of the state's newspapers, including the Shreveport Times in Alexander's Shreveport, endorsed Caldwell. Foti, a former Orleans Parish criminal sheriff, had lost favor with voters over controversies involving the prosecution of medical professionals in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.
Shortly before the three-candidate primary for attorney general on October 20, 2007, it was revealed that Caldwell's son, David Caldwell, was employed by former Attorney General Foti. Caldwell was himself a Foti supporter in the 2003 election.. Nevertheless, Caldwell led the primary with 434,507 votes (36 percent). Alexander ran second with 395,498 (32 percent). Foti polled 389,300 votes (also 32 percent) but trailed Alexander and was hence eliminated from the general election competition. 
In the general election, Caldwell defeated Alexander by a 2-1 margin. Caldwell received 477,574 votes (67 percent) to Alexander's 239,485 (33 percent). Just hours prior to the general election, Alexander had filed and then withdrew from a suit against Caldwell on grounds that the Democrat had "lied" about Alexander in television advertising. Alexander said that he had to drop the suit because Louisiana law permits lying as a form of free expression in political campaigns. 
Caldwell was the fourth of seven children born to J.D. Caldwell, Sr. (1910-1987), and the former Genevieve Minsky (1916-2001) in tiny Columbia, the seat of Caldwell Parish, and the home of former Governor John McKeithen and McKeithen's son, the late Louisiana Secretary of State W. Fox McKeithen, a Caldwell family friend. The Caldwells moved permanently to rural Madison Parish in 1949. J.D. Caldwell obtained a master's degree in music from Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge and sang earlier with the Metropolitan Opera in New York City. After moving to Tallulah, the senior Caldwell became a farmer and clothing merchant. Mrs. Caldwell, a registered nurse, held a degree from Touro Infirmary of New Orleans. She was a public health nurse and later a Madison Parish school health nurse for thirty years. 
Buddy Caldwell is not related to the late Louisiana Second Judicial District Court Judge David T. Caldwell of Jonesboro or to that Judge Caldwell's son, James David "Jimmy" Caldwell (born ca. 1949), a practicing attorney in Shreveport.
Caldwell graduated from Tallulah High School in 1964 when it was still segregated, albeit certain Caldwell family members continued supporting white flight, which has been denoted by the Supreme Court when found in other states to be segregating and discriminatory. 
Caldwell lettered in basketball, football, and track. He worked in his mother's family drug store during his teen years. Caldwell also played semi-professional baseball in North Louisiana while he was still in high school, as did several other Louisiana politicians, including the late Education Superintendent Bill Dodd and former State Representatives Lantz Womack of Winnsboro, the seat of Franklin Parish, and L.D. "Buddy" Napper of Ruston, the seat of Lincoln Parish. 
Caldwell earned his bachelor of arts degree in psychology, with a minor in history, from Tulane University in New Orleans, where he also played football and ran track. In 1973, he received his law degree from the Tulane University Law School and thereafter established his solo law practice in Tallulah, which he maintained until becoming district attorney six years later.
Caldwell was first elected district attorney of the small Sixth Judicial District on September 16, 1978, when he was thirty-two. He assumed the office, which is located in Tallulah, on January 1, 1979. From 1983-1996, Caldwell served on the board of directors of the Louisiana District Attorney's Association. While district attorney, he personally tried felony cases in his district. Suspects rarely won acquittal when Caldwell was the prosecutor. Critics, however, note that Caldwell maintained a high conviction rate by not prosecuting the "hard" cases. Caldwell also claimed the highest per capita collection rate for back child support in the state.
The three-parish district, the most northeastern in the state, is heavily Democratic and includes a high concentration of African American voters. On his website, Caldwell contended that he established "positive working relationships throughout Louisiana with Sheriffs, other District Attorneys, Mayors, Parish and Town Councils, School Boards, Justices of the Peace, Constables, and other local officials. I also have experience working with federal agencies like the United States Justice Department, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Drug Enforcement Administration, and the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms agency."
Caldwell won his third term as district attorney in 1990, when in a low-turnout election he defeated fellow Democrat Samuel Thomas, 6,711 (61 percent) to 4,277 (39 percent). He was unopposed in 1996. Caldwell secured a fifth term in 2002, when he defeated fellow Democrat Raymond "Ray" Cannon, 4,987 (56 percent) to 3,931 (44 percent) in another low-turnout election.
While District Attorney for multiple parishes, Caldwell repeatedly refused to investigate and indict family members. In repeated audit findings from the Louisiana Board of Ethics and Legislative Auditors, Carolyn and Ray Caldwell, as well as their children, other family members, and friends, were discovered to be inappropriately profiting from Madison's Office of Clerk of Court finances. 
Caldwell and his fourth wife, Pat M. Caldwell, have a combined seven grown children and six grandchildren. In December 1994, Caldwell married for the third time in Las Vegas. A few months later, he was served with divorce papers by his new wife. Four days after that, she was terminated as the "confidential assistant" to Louisiana Secretary of State Fox McKeithen. Caldwell testified that he arranged for his third wife's hiring with the help of an employee of the attorney general's office, which in other states could be known as nepotism. "I've known Fox ever since we were children," Caldwell said. The third Mrs. Caldwell testified that McKeithen called her into his office on May 12, 1995, and they discussed her divorce case: "I was terminated from my job. I was upset. I was crying. I have a child to support. I could not survive without a job." Amid the divorce proceedings, Caldwell dropped a bid for lieutenant governor that year on the grounds that his position as district attorney would not allow him time to campaign. The lieutenant governorship was instead won by eventual Louisiana Governor Kathleen Babineaux Blanco of Lafayette.
Former Legislative Auditor Dan Kyle of Baton Rouge, an unsuccessful Republican candidate for insurance commissioner in 2003, was a leading critic of Caldwell's attorney general candidacy. Kyle reported that in 1997 Caldwell "spent $1,529 in D.A. office funds to pay for personal items, including clothing and golfing expenses." The expenses included air fare to Montana and golf fees in Alabama.
According to The Advocate, Kyle claimed that Caldwell tried "to quash release of parts of the audit . . . and used foul language and threats in an unsuccessful attempt to block the audit." Then, Kyle accused Caldwell of having blamed his own secretary for the questionable spending: "Caldwell also said the spending problem in the 1997 audit was a mistake by his secretary, adding that he personally brought it to the auditor's attention." In Committee Room 3,during a Legislation probe, Mr. Caldwell was testified against by the auditor who stated that Mr. Caldwell said, "Some very racist remarks, because the police jury we were issuing the audit on were all minorities, he told me I just needed a white man to issue an audit on. I said'no' the findings are the same. You've done the same thing these people have done and justice is justice. And, I have to issue both reports. And, if you'll look at them, they both have the same data on them." The auditor stated that he was later told Mr. Caldwell "is a loose cannon... out to get you. He is dangerous. You need protection." 
Three years later, Caldwell accused Kyle's investigators of "an array of questionable activities ranging from improperly bugging conversations to having sex with witnesses in audit investigations" in testimony before the Legislative Audit Advisory Council. Caldwell "told the council . . . that state auditors working in north Louisiana had suppressed evidence, secretly tape-recorded interviews with witnesses, and compromised the credibility of witnesses in possible criminal investigations. Caldwell later told reporters he also knew of instances of an auditor in Kyle's office having sexual relations with people being audited." Caldwell gave no details, according to Kyle.
Caldwell subpoenaed two of Kyle's investigators before a grand jury in Tallulah. Kyle later claimed that Caldwell was trying to indict Kyle or the investigators. According to the New Orleans Times-Picayune, Caldwell said after the Legislative Audit Advisory Council meeting that he "might reopen a grand jury investigation of Kyle's office." 
Caldwell also came under fire for his role as a self-appointed special prosecutor in a case against St. Tammany Parish Judge Patricia Hedges. He filed charges of extortion, public bribery, and malfeasance against the judge, only to drop all claims without explanation on the premise that he could not have won a conviction without a jury trial.
As an entertainer and singer, Caldwell has performed before state, regional, and national groups, particularly teachers, coaches, and school administrators in the southeastern United States. He has also entertained Commissioners of Agriculture, Clerks of Court, fellow District Attorneys, Justices of the Peace, the Louisiana Police Jury county commission in most states Association, Relay for Life, and the United Way. Like his father, he can also sing opera.
Larry "Butch" Hartman (May 11, 1940 – December 22, 1994) was an American stock car racing national champion in the United States Automobile Club (USAC) from Zanesville, Ohio. After winning the USAC Stock Car Rookie of the Year award in 1966, the series' Most Improved Driver in 1967, and its Most Outstanding Driver the following year. He won five USAC Stock car national titles in the 1970s. Hartman had the fourth highest number of USAC Stock car wins in the series' history. Hartman raced in twenty NASCAR stock car races; his highest finish was a fifth place run at National 500 at Charlotte Motor Speedway (now Lowe's Motor Speedway). Hartman worked full-time at his father's company, building his own engines and towing his cars to the track each weekend. In 1968, he became the first rookie to lead the Daytona 500.
He was an independent driver in an era of factory teams. He raced a #75 Dodge car with yellow and black colors, sponsored by his father's company "Hartman White and Autocar Truck Sales and Service".
Hartman was a second generation racer. His father, Dick, started racing sprint cars in 1949. By 1951, the elder Hartman was racing two cars and won 126 races in a two year period.
Hartman began working on cars at age 7 when he helped his father warm up cars for his father's automobile repair company. For his ninth birthday, his father gave an old 1939 Ford sedan to him and his brother Terry for them to drive around in a field in an adjacent property, with the condition that the brothers needed to repair the car. They nicknamed the car "Death and Destruction". After attending Otterbein College for one year, he was sent to the United States Marines for four years.
In 1964, Hartman started competing in up to five stock cars races in a weekend, driving with his father and uncle. "When we had the time," Butch said, "we'd sleep for a couple of hours in ditches alongside the road. When we didn't, one of us would stand on the running board of our old Buick and fuel our pickup truck with a five-gallon can of gas while we were tearing down the road. I think we invented in-flight refueling."
In 1966, Hartman entered a 1965 Dodge Coronet in his first USAC race. He was awarded the series' Rookie of the Year award for 1966. He had his first NASCAR start that season, a 14th place finish at the Grand National (now Sprint Cup Series) National 500 at Charlotte. He followed up in 1967 as the series' Most Improved Driver, then was the Most Outstanding Driver in 1968. He competed in five Grand National events that year, with 10th place finishes at Atlanta Motor Speedway and Rockingham.
Hartman had his first USAC Stock car win in 1971 at Pocono Raceway driving a winged Dodge Charger Daytona in the first Pocono 500. The race featured Wally Dallenbach, Sr., A. J. Foyt, Roger McCluskey, Al Unser, Bobby Unser, NASCAR drivers Jim Paschal and LeeRoy Yarbrough, AMA racer Gene Romero, modified racers Geoff Bodine and Toby Tobias, road racer Brian Redman, and USAC stock car regulars Jack Bowsher, Don White, and Norm Nelson. After completing 41 laps, the race was postponed for a week after it was rained out. The following Saturday, Hartman beat Lem Blankenship in a late race duel. Hartman won his first USAC championship that year. He had a win at the Knoxville Raceway that season.
Hartman won his second USAC Stock car title in 1972. He had a consistent season with nine Top 5 finishes in eighteen races. He had one start in NASCAR's Grand National division; the fifth place finish was his highest finish in his NASCAR career. The event was FIA sanctioned and USAC drivers were encouraged to race in the event. He got a Junie Donlavey ride after USAC regular Ramo Stott has a second place finish at Talladega Superspeedway earlier that season. The 1973 USAC season had 16 races. He won seven races and had 12 Top 5 finishes to record his third straight championship. 
Hartman was trailing Norm Nelson by 40 points going into the final race of the 1974 USAC season. He won the race at Des Moines; Nelson finished 7th and Hartman won the title by 30 points. In the 19 race season, Hartman had won eight races to record his fourth straight championship. Hartman battled Ramo Stott for the 1975 championship, but a blown motor at the Governor's Cup 250 at the Milwaukee Mile ended his title hopes causing him to finish second in the season points. Hartman surprised people by switching to a Chevrolet Camaro for the 1976 USAC stock car season which he won his fifth championship in the new car.
Hartman was critical of USAC's promotion of its stock car series compared to how the sanctioning body promoted its championship cars and how NASCAR billed its stock cars. "…nobody ever heard of our stock car racing circuit. We get second billing everywhere to the championship cars. Here I am a two-time champion (in 1972) and nobody knows who I am."
In 1977, he decided to race in NASCAR's top division, then called the Winston Cup. As a five-time USAC stock car champion, he had been receiving less money and received a lower billing at USAC stock car races than USAC champ car and NASCAR stock car drivers. He competed in 11 events and finished 31st in season points, with two Top 10 finishes in a Chevrolet Chevelle. He competed in one NASCAR event in 1978 and another in 1979 before returning to USAC. He had to use #00, as another driver had taken #75. USAC's stock car series had become stagnant, and it was gone by 1985. Hartman had retired in the early 1980s.
He was inducted in the National Dirt Late Model Hall of Fame in 2004 for his USAC Stock Car championships and scoring "hundreds of feature wins and track titles in long career."
Hartman's youngest son Bart Hartman became a racer; as of 2007 he raced dirt late models in Ohio.
, is a 1993 video game produced by Konami for the Sharp X68000 home computer. In its original double floppy disk form, the game was never released outside of Japan since the Sharp X68000 was exclusive to the Japanese market. It has been unofficially dubbed "Akumajō Dracula X68000" and "Castlevania X68000" to differentiate it from other games in the series that are also called Akumajō Dracula. 
In 2001, the original version was ported and enhanced by Konami as Castlevania Chronicles for the PlayStation gaming console. The game was released outside of Japan, making Akumajō Dracula available to the North American and European markets for the first time. Castlevania Chronicles was made available for download via the PlayStation Network as a PSOne Classic on December 18, 2008.
Akumajō Dracula is a game based on Castlevania, with a completely new engine designed to take advantage of the Sharp X68000 hardware. The entire game is completely updated, including familiar stages that have been redesigned, as well as brand new stages altogether. It contains all of the special items and sub-weapons from the original game, as well as an exclusive rare item known as the laurel, which refills six health blocks for 10 hearts. This game is also notable for its high difficulty level. 
Like the original Akumajō Dracula game, hidden items worth points and hidden 1-ups will appear throughout the game if the player ducks or stands in particular portions of a level. Another notable feature is the multiple loops after the game is completed. Previous Castlevania games had increased difficulty for the game's second playthrough. An increased amount of damage taken from enemies in earlier levels as well as new enemy placement and attack patterns were just a few things to make the second playthrough more difficult. This game, however, has as many as six additional playthroughs with each one becoming much more difficult than the last. There are even cases of special Easter eggs; on the sixth playthrough on stage 18 (block 6-3), a cartoon image of Simon will appear in a set of mirrors smoking a cigarette accompanied by Japanese text in one of the background areas saying "Here's Fake Simon!".
The PlayStation re-release, Castlevania Chronicles, expanded much more to the X68000 game. This includes a brand new rendered intro and ending, with new character designs by Ayami Kojima (of Castlevania: Symphony of the Night fame), a new sprite design for Simon Belmont and Dracula, improved graphical effects, enhanced music and sound effects, and a more balanced and adjustable difficulty level. Players can choose to play this "Arrange Mode" version of the game with all of the new features intact, or play the "Original Mode" version as it was originally presented on the Sharp X68000.
Completing portions of the "Arrange Mode" also unlocks special features including an art gallery as well as a "Time Attack Mode". Exclusive to the U.S. and European versions of Chronicles, the art gallery features artwork by Ayami Kojima for Chronicles and Castlevania: Symphony of the Night. The latter game images were already featured in the Sega Saturn version of Symphony (the art of the Succubus is censored, since her chest in the original was topless). The "Time Attack Mode" allows the player to race through any stage, complete with a time meter, to beat their best time.
Also exclusive to the U.S. and European versions of Chronicles is an interview with Koji "IGA" Igarishi.
The storyline for both Akumajō Dracula (X68000) and Castlevania Chronicles is the same as the original Akumajō Dracula game. Simon Belmont has to set out to defeat the evil Count Dracula, who has been terrorizing the area. 
In the year 1691, the evil Count Dracula has risen once again after a century of rest to terrorize the people of Transylvania. Simon Belmont picks up the Vampire Killer whip and sets out to Castlevania to destroy the Lord of Darkness and restore peace to Europe.
The introduction to both versions of this remake retell the story of Dracula's resurrection in 1691. Followers of Dracula perform a ritual to revive him at the start of the game.
The music for the X68000 game contains a variety of new arrangements of familiar tunes from the series as well as brand new compositions altogether. The familiar songs include: "Vampire Killer" and "Wicked Child" from the original Castlevania, "Bloody Tears" from Castlevania II: Simon's Quest, and "Theme of Simon Belmont" from Super Castlevania IV. Before each game, the player is given a choice between three different sound modules: the X68000's FM Synthesizer, MIDI Roland LA (MT-32, CM-32L, CM-64) and MIDI Roland GS (SC-55, SC-33, SC-155, CM-300, CM-500). While the soundtrack will remain the same throughout the game regardless of which sound module is chosen, the instrumentation may vary and some songs will be arranged slightly differently.
Sōta Fujimori, staff composer for the Konami Corporation in Japan, performed all new arrangements of the soundtrack for Castlevania Chronicles' "Arrange Mode". While many songs remain very similar to their Akumajo Dracula (X68000) counterparts, except with studio recorded live synth and other live instrumentation, a handful of songs are given a techno feel. Some of these songs include: "Vampire Killer", which now contains pieces of "Prologue" and "Stalker" from Castlevania; "Thrashard in the Cave", which is more ambient than its original version; and "Wicked Child". In the Japanese Chronicles, unlike the US and European versions, the sound hardware selection screen automatically appears before starting a game on "Original Mode" just as it did in Akumajō Dracula (X68000). A code must be entered to reach it in either mode in the U.S. and European versions, while the Japanese version only requires one to be entered in "Arrange Mode".
While the "Original Mode" presented on Chronicles is otherwise identical to the X68000 game, there are a few limitations since it is emulated on different hardware. One noticeable difference is the brief loading times that now appear before boss fights and stages. The other drawback is the lack of an internal clock on the PlayStation. The original game utilized the X68000’s internal time and date settings; the time on the clock tower during the boss fight on stage 15 would reflect the X68000’s current time and the color scheme used on the painting in stage 21 would reflect one of the four seasons according to the computer's current date. On the PlayStation game, each time the system is turned on, the time and date have to be manually adjusted only after a hidden "Extra Option" menu is accessed by inputting an altered version of the Konami Code.
During regular gameplay, there are a few noticeable changes between the Japanese release and the U.S./European release of Chronicles. The marionettes on stage 17 cry out "Yamete!" ("Stop!" in Japanese) and "Omae wa dare?" ("Who are you?", in Japanese) when attacked in Akumajō Dracula (X68000) and the Japanese Chronicles. For localization purposes, they are silent other than when they are destroyed in the U.S. and European versions. Audio-wise, the Japanese version of Chronicles had slowdown issues with the music playback. These were fixed for the U.S. and European releases. Lastly, exclusive to "Arrange Mode" on the U.S. and European versions, the player can save the game at stage 24 (the battle with Dracula).
IGN rated the Playstation release 7.8, saying it did not quite measure up with later titles, but was "still a lot of fun". Gamespot gave that same release a 6.1, saying it lacked replay value and was graphically outdated.
"Cause and Effect" is the 16th episode and the season finale of the sixth season of the American television series Numb3rs. In the episode, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agents and mathematicians attempt to find one agent's gun before it is used in a violent crime. When series creators/executive producers Cheryl Heuton and Nicolas Falacci learned that the number of episodes airing during the season was reduced, they felt that they needed to finish storylines in case the series was cancelled. To do so, they wrote an open-ended story to serve as either a season finale or a series finale. 
Originally set to air in May, "Cause and Effect" first aired in the United States on March 12, 2010. Critics mostly focused on the potential cancellation of the series, but two reviewers gave the episode reviews. "Cause and Effect" became Numb3rs series finale after CBS's cancellation of the series on May 19, 2010.
Drs. Charlie Eppes (David Krumholtz) and Amita Ramanujan (Navi Rawat) are married at CalSci. Charlie's father Alan Eppes (Judd Hirsch), Charlie's older brother FBI Special Agent Don Eppes (Rob Morrow), and friends FBI Special Agents David Sinclair (Alimi Ballard), Colby Granger (Dylan Bruno), Nikki Betancourt (Sophina Brown), and Assistant United States Attorney Robin Brooks (Michelle Nolden) attend the ceremony. Charlie and Amita's friend and fellow colleague Dr. Larry Fleinhardt (Peter MacNicol) officiates. After receiving a call from FBI Special Agent Liz Warner (Aya Sumika), Don and David leave the reception to arrest Ted Dacosta (Luke Rosen), a man wanted on fraud charges. During the arrest, a man who has just learned that Decosta had swindled him tackles Don and David. The tackle knocks Don's gun away from him. Someone picks the gun up and walks away from the scene. A member of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) questions Don about the incident, and Don completes the required paperwork. Nikki contacts her former colleagues at the LAPD for assistance.
At Charlie's house, Alan and Charlie notice that Don is upset about losing his gun. Charlie offers to help his brother locate the gun, but Don refuses, citing Charlie and Amita's upcoming visiting professorships at Cambridge. Don receives a call about two drug dealers who were fatally shot with Don's gun. None of the neighbors appear upset about the dealers' deaths. A tip from LAPD leads the FBI team to the leader of the community crime watch. He insists that he did not have the gun but later confesses to possessing it when presented with contradictory evidence. Don confesses to Robin that he feels that the search for his gun could determine his future with the FBI. Robin replies that the current case should not influence his decision. Meanwhile, FBI technician Matt Li (Matthew Yang King) discovers many references to Don's gun as a vigilante gun on several social networking sites. Charlie, Amita, Larry, and Otto Bahnoff (John Cariani), a plasma physicist who has assisted the FBI on two previous cases , use the small world network to track the gun. While discussing the math, Don and Charlie agree that, although they had spent their lives apart from each other, they want to keep the relationship they have with each other. The team receives another call, this time leading them to the body of a woman who planned to drink and drive without a driver's license. 
Amita, Charlie, Larry, and Otto find a woman who used her real personal information on a web site which referenced Don's gun. The woman tells the agents that she passed the gun to someone named Jim. Don and David question Jim Mazzolla (David Burke), who claims that his neighbor Michael Hiller (Vyto Ruginis) had been bullying them Mazzolla and his family. Both Mazzolla and Hiller deny being in possession of Don's gun. With Charlie's analysis and further investigation, the agents discover that Mazzolla, a criminal, was in the area where Don lost his gun the day of the incident. Don and David return to Mazzolla's house, where they discover Mazzolla's son, Jim Jr., (Bridger Zadina) holding Hiller at gunpoint. Don wrestles the gun from Jim Jr. and arrests Hiller on unspecified charges. FBI Special Agent Ian Edgerton (Lou Diamond Phillips) suddenly appears to escort Hiller. Ian informs Don and David that the team's earlier background check on Hiller, an escaped prisoner from Florida, alerted Ian to Hiller's location. Ian also expresses disappointment about not being able to attend Charlie and Amita's wedding. At the FBI office, Colby, Liz, and Nikki discuss David's new promotion to team leader of an anti-corruption team based from the Washington, DC FBI field office. Don, who recommended him for the position, tells David that David will do well in his new position. At Charlie's house, the Eppes family and the team celebrate Charlie and Amita's wedding. Charlie and Amita inform the group that they will be converting the garage into a guesthouse for Alan so that Alan, who had decided to find an apartment since Charlie and Amita have married, can have space and that they can have him live near them. Charlie wants to provide for Alan, and Amita is willing due to her Indian heritage. Confident about his work with the FBI, Don tells Robin that he will accept a promotion to become a special agent in charge. Don proposes to Robin, and she accepts. As Alan designs the new guesthouse, he, Don, and Charlie discuss the changes and the constants in their lives.
Citing a decrease in ratings, CBS reduced Numb3rs' episode order, the number of episodes airing per season, from 22 to 16 on November 4, 2009. Although the series had high ratings for the night, the 18-49 demographic was not as strong. CBS also wanted to air a series during the middle of the season. 
For the cast and crew, the announcement about the reduction in the episode order came during the production of the eleventh episode of the sixth season. Series creators/executive producers Cheryl Heuton and Nicolas Falacci, who wrote "Cause and Effect", developed the episode to be a season finale that could also serve as a series finale in case the show was cancelled. They decided to write the episode in a way in which fans would see some kind of resolution of storylines in the event that the series was cancelled. They included some closure to several storylines, especially David's storyline and to one of Don's storylines.
To finish the season's storyline, several plot lines had to be modified by removing some individual stories within the season's main storyline or by revising some stories. For example, writers had planned for Charlie and Amita's wedding to be ornate with 200 people and with Amita's parents in attendance. Heuton and Falacci changed it to a small wedding at CalSci with Larry officiating the ceremony. 
Originally, the episode was scheduled to air in May. CBS had planned to air the Numb3rs season finale in February. The network scheduled the episode to air on March 12, 2010.
Over 8.34 million people in the United States watched "Cause and Effect". Critically, the critics focused on the idea of the episode being a series finale, but two commented on the episode. Rob Owen, a television critic with the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, stated, "Kudos to them the producers of Numb3rs for rewarding long-time fans by crafting the season finale to also function as a series finale." Matt Roush of TV Guide Magazine's web site stated that the episode had So much closure, more than I expected actually,…."
When CBS executives made the announcement about the order cut, CBS executives cautioned that it was too early to know whether Numb3rs would be cancelled. When asked about the fate of Numb3rs, CBS executive Nina Tassler stated that executives cut the order for Numb3rs to air Miami Medical , which was scheduled to air midseason. Television critics expected Numb3rs to end at the end of the 2009-2010 television season. Citing a decline in ratings and a need to debut new series, CBS announced on May 19, 2010, that Numb3rs was cancelled , making "Cause and Effect" the series finale.
The Confession of Faith of the Evangelical United Brethren Church is one of three established Doctrinal Standards of the United Methodist Church, along with the Articles of Religion and the Standard Sermons of John Wesley. The United Methodist Church adopted the Confession of Faith in 1968 when the Methodist Church merged with the Evangelical United Brethren Church to form the United Methodist Church. The Confession of Faith covers much of the same ground as the Articles of Religion, but it is shorter and the language is more contemporary. The Confession of Faith also contains an article on the Judgment and Future State (derived from the Augsburg Confession) which had not been present in the Methodist Articles of Religion.
(See Articles of Religion (Methodist) for the 25 Articles). 
'''THE CONFESSION OF FAITH OF THE EVANGELICAL UNITED BRETHREN CHURCH
6Bibliographical Note: The text of the Confession of Faith is identical to that of its original in The Discipline of The Evangelical United Brethren Church (1963).'''
Article I—God
We believe in the one true, holy and living God, Eternal Spirit, who is Creator, Sovereign and Preserver of all things visible and invisible. He is infinite in power, wisdom, justice, goodness and love, and rules with gracious regard for the well-being and salvation of men, to the glory of his name. We believe the one God reveals himself as the Trinity: Father, Son and Holy Spirit, distinct but inseparable, eternally one in essence and power.
Article II—Jesus Christ
We believe in Jesus Christ, truly God and truly man, in whom the divine and human natures are perfectly and inseparably united. He is the eternal Word made flesh, the only begotten Son of the Father, born of the Virgin Mary by the power of the Holy Spirit. As ministering Servant he lived, suffered and died on the cross. He was buried, rose from the dead and ascended into heaven to be with the Father, from whence he shall return. He is eternal Savior and Mediator, who intercedes for us, and by him all men will be judged.
Article III—The Holy Spirit
We believe in the Holy Spirit who proceeds from and is one in being with the Father and the Son. He convinces the world of sin, of righteousness and of judgment. He leads men through faithful response to the gospel into the fellowship of the Church. He comforts, sustains and empowers the faithful and guides them into all truth.
Article IV—The Holy Bible
We believe the Holy Bible, Old and New Testaments, reveals the Word of God so far as it is necessary for our salvation. It is to be received through the Holy Spirit as the true rule and guide for faith and practice. Whatever is not revealed in or established by the Holy Scriptures is not to be made an article of faith nor is it to be taught as essential to salvation.
Article V—The Church
We believe the Christian Church is the community of all true believers under the Lordship of Christ. We believe it is one, holy, apostolic and catholic. It is the redemptive fellowship in which the Word of God is preached by men divinely called, and the sacraments are duly administered according to Christ's own appointment. Under the discipline of the Holy Spirit the Church exists for the maintenance of worship, the edification of believers and the redemption of the world.
Article VI—The Sacraments
We believe the Sacraments, ordained by Christ, are symbols and pledges of the Christian's profession and of God's love toward us. They are means of grace by which God works invisibly in us, quickening, strengthening and confirming our faith in him. Two Sacraments are ordained by Christ our Lord, namely Baptism and the Lord's Supper.We bel
ieve Baptism signifies entrance into the household of faith, and is a symbol of repentance and inner cleansing from sin, a representation of the new birth in Christ Jesus and a mark of Christian discipleship.
We believe children are under the atonement of Christ and as heirs of the Kingdom of God are acceptable subjects for Christian Baptism. Children of believing parents through Baptism become the special responsibility of the Church. They should be nurtured and led to personal acceptance of Christ, and by profession of faith confirm their Baptism.
We believe the Lord's Supper is a representation of our redemption, a memorial of the sufferings and death of Christ, and a token of love and union which Christians have with Christ and with one another. Those who rightly, worthily and in faith eat the broken bread and drink the blessed cup partake of the body and blood of Christ in a spiritual manner until he comes.
Article VII—Sin and Free Will
We believe man is fallen from righteousness and, apart from the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, is destitute of holiness and inclined to evil. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. In his own strength, without divine grace, man cannot do good works pleasing and acceptable to God. We believe, however, man influenced and empowered by the Holy Spirit is responsible in freedom to exercise his will for good.
Article VIII—Reconciliation Through Christ
We believe God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. The offering Christ freely made on the cross is the perfect and sufficient sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, redeeming man from all sin, so that no other satisfaction is required.
Article IX—Justification and Regeneration
We believe we are never accounted righteous before God through our works or merit, but that penitent sinners are justified or accounted righteous before God only by faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
We believe regeneration is the renewal of man in righteousness through Jesus Christ, by the power of the Holy Spirit, whereby we are made partakers of the divine nature and experience newness of life. By this new birth the believer becomes reconciled to God and is enabled to serve him with the will and the affections.
We believe, although we have experienced regeneration, it is possible to depart from grace and fall into sin; and we may even then, by the grace of God, be renewed in righteousness.
Article X—Good Works
We believe good works are the necessary fruits of faith and follow regeneration but they do not have the virtue to remove our sins or to avert divine judgment. We believe good works, pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, spring from a true and living faith, for through and by them faith is made evident.
Article XI—Sanctification and Christian Perfection
We believe sanctification is the work of God's grace through the Word and the Spirit, by which those who have been born again are cleansed from sin in their thoughts, words and acts, and are enabled to live in accordance with God's will, and to strive for holiness without which no one will see the Lord.
Entire sanctification is a state of perfect love, righteousness and true holiness which every regenerate believer may obtain by being delivered from the power of sin, by loving God with all the heart, soul, mind and strength, and by loving one's neighbor as one's self. Through faith in Jesus Christ this gracious gift may be received in this life both gradually and instantaneously, and should be sought earnestly by every child of God.
We believe this experience does not deliver us from the infirmities, ignorance, and mistakes common to man, nor from the possibilities of further sin. The Christian must continue on guard against spiritual pride and seek to gain victory over every temptation to sin. He must respond wholly to the will of God so that sin will lose its power over him; and the world, the flesh, and the devil are put under his feet. Thus he rules over these enemies with watchfulness through the power of the Holy Spirit.
Article XII—The Judgment and the Future State
We believe all men stand under the righteous judgment of Jesus Christ, both now and in the last day. We believe in the resurrection of the dead; the righteous to life eternal and the wicked to endless condemnation.
Article XIII—Public Worship
We believe divine worship is the duty and privilege of man who, in the presence of God, bows in adoration, humility and dedication. We believe divine worship is essential to the life of the Church, and that the assembling of the people of God for such worship is necessary to Christian fellowship and spiritual growth.
We believe the order of public worship need not be the same in all places but may be modified by the church according to circumstances and the needs of men. It should be in a language and form understood by the people, consistent with the Holy Scriptures to the edification of all, and in accordance with the order and Discipline of the Church.
Article XIV—The Lord's Day
We believe the Lord's Day is divinely ordained for private and public worship, for rest from unnecessary work, and should be devoted to spiritual improvement, Christian fellowship and service. It is commemorative of our Lord's resurrection and is an emblem of our eternal rest. It is essential to the permanence and growth of the Christian Church, and important to the welfare of the civil community.
Article XV—The Christian and Property
We believe God is the owner of all things and that the individual holding of property is lawful and is a sacred trust under God. Private property is to be used for the manifestation of Christian love and liberality, and to support the Church's mission in the world. All forms of property, whether private, corporate or public, are to be held in solemn trust and used responsibly for human good under the sovereignty of God.
Article XVI—Civil Government
We believe civil government derives its just powers from the sovereign God. As Christians we recognize the governments under whose protection we reside and believe such governments should be based on, and be responsible for, the recognition of human rights under God. We believe war and bloodshed are contrary to the gospel and spirit of Christ. We believe it is the duty of Christian citizens to give moral strength and purpose to their respective governments through sober, righteous and godly living.

 
Daphne Moon Crane (born September 1971) is a fictional character on the American television sitcom Frasier, played by Jane Leeves.
Daphne is a recent immigrant from England who is employed by Frasier Crane as a live-in housekeeper and physical therapist for his father, Martin. Her quirky personality and claims of psychic abilities provided comic relief on the show, while her relationship with Frasier's brother Niles Crane was a major dramatic plotline during the run of the series, progressing from Niles' secret infatuation at the beginning of the show to their marriage at the beginning of season ten. The role was originally to be filled by Lisa Maxwell who left before production began due to a dispute with producers.
Daphne was born in Manchester, England, the only daughter in a large, working-class family of nine children. She spent much of her childhood playing nurse and housemaid to her brothers. She has a complex love-hate relationship with her domineering and ever-complaining mother, Gertrude Moon (played by Millicent Martin); her relationship with her father, Harry (played by Brian Cox), is much warmer and closer. 
As a young girl, Daphne was an actress in the fictional hit British sitcom Mind Your Knickers (a show about "ethnically diverse" twelve year olds in a private girls boarding school, possibly named in reference to the 1970s British sitcom Mind Your Language). Her career ended at age 16 when she became too tall and busty to play her short, pre-teen character. During her youth, she gained considerable skill at billiards, claiming to have won many tournaments. After working at a convenience store (which she implies was robbed) Daphne then took up a career as a physical therapist, working one-on-one with various invalids and shut-ins. At an indeterminate time, she migrates across the Atlantic to live in Seattle, seeking a new life free of her domineering family. In the third season finale "You Can Go Home Again", it is revealed that prior to being hired by the Cranes, she had a chance encounter with them at Cafe Nervosa. In the first season premiere "The Good Son" Daphne is hired by Frasier Crane to assist Frasier's father, Martin Crane, with his daily activities and exercises. Martin suffers pain and discomfort from a bullet wound he received years ago while working on the Seattle police force.
Like most characters on Frasier, Daphne has many eccentricities. She often tells rambling stories about her family, cheerfully remembering rather grim or traumatic events, to the considerable discomfort of the Crane family. She is also a firm believer in the supernatural, and believes herself to be "a bit psychic". Daphne's apparent psychic abilities are often treated with ambiguity on the show, and her various 'visions' are sometimes shown to have come true, sometimes in a roundabout way and sometimes very accurately. On the other hand, for the first seven seasons of the series, the supposedly psychic Daphne never suspects Niles' passionate infatuation with her, which is painfully evident to all the other main characters. (Indeed, she only finally learns of this when Frasier, in a tranquilized, drowsy state, tells her outright.) As the series progressed, Daphne's psychic abilities were considerably down played.
Daphne's most significant developing relationship over the course of the series is with Frasier Crane's younger brother, Niles Crane. Unbeknownst to Daphne, Niles falls in love with her in the third episode, when they first meet; despite the increasing obviousness of Niles' infatuation, Daphne remains utterly oblivious to Niles' feelings towards her, though they become increasingly close friends. Niles says nothing to Daphne, at first because he is married, later because she is involved with numerous (frequently unsuccessful) relationships with other men. Even when she is not, Frasier has one excuse or another to prevent Niles from telling her anything.
Niles' feelings are ultimately, and accidentally, revealed by Frasier in Season 7. Shocked to discover Niles' true feelings towards her, Daphne finds herself falling in love with Niles in return, placing her in the position Niles had been in for many years: in love with someone unaware of her true feelings.
Heartbroken to discover that he had, on impulse, married his girlfriend Mel, Daphne intends to go ahead with her own marriage to Niles' divorce lawyer Donny, until Frasier intervenes. In a four-part episode closing Season 7 and opening Season 8, Niles finally confesses his feelings to her, and although she initially tells him both of them are better off staying with their current partners(each having made a serious commitment), Daphne changes her mind by the next morning, abandoning Donny at the altar, to Niles' euphoria. 
The guilt she suffers as a result, and the difficulties in Daphne and Niles' new relationship, cause Daphne to begin overeating (a previous episode established her as eating junk food when upset, causing her family to believe she's pregnant). She gains sixty pounds (4 stone 4 pounds), but Niles is so blinded by love he doesn't notice until Daphne falls to the floor and is too heavy to get up without the help of Frasier, Niles and Martin (who remarks "it took three Cranes to lift you"). The weight problem was written into the show to allow Leeves to continue working while pregnant. Daphne then left for several weeks to attend "fat camp" and returned with her figure restored. During the episode "It Takes Two to Tangle" in which she did not appear while at the resort, Niles tells Roz that Daphne had lost 9 pounds, 12 ounces (the weight of Leeves' baby in real life).
At some point in Season 10, she becomes a U.S. Citizen. In the first episode of Season 10, Daphne and Niles marry in a small, private ceremony in Reno, Nevada. The rest of Season 10 and early Season 11 show Daphne and Niles adjusting to their new life as a wedded couple. Daphne and Niles have their first child, David, in the final episode of the series, "Goodnight, Seattle". (He is named after the show's co-creator David Angell who died in the September 11, 2001 attacks.)
She initially drives a small Ford, based on the UK Focus, which she uses to take the family to the burial plots which Martin purchases for Frasier and Niles. In the episode where her room is violated by the family, Frasier is forced into buying her a Ford Mustang convertible. We later see this vehicle in the episode where Martin is looking for replacement shoes. When she marries Niles, she clearly ends up benefiting from his wealth too. She drives a BMW X5, which is amusing considering Niles' fondness of Mercedes.
Daphne grew up in a very large dysfunctional family. They are often the subject of her long-winded tales that sometimes leave the Cranes somewhat perplexed. Although frequently mentioned, the first time one of her family members appears on the show is in the season 7 episode "Dark Side of the Moon", in which Donny surprises Daphne with a visit from her brother, Simon (Anthony LaPaglia), not knowing that she dislikes him (her favorite brother, Stephen, never appears until the final episode, where he is played by Richard E. Grant). In "Something Borrowed, Someone Blue" Daphne's mother makes her first appearance, while her father only makes his debut in Season 9. 
On one episode she mentions she had an ancestor who served on the HMS Bounty who took Fletcher Christian's side in the mutiny. According to her he made it to Pitcairn Island with a Tahitian wife and had several children. When she mentioned to Niles that there may be Polynesian version of her on the island, he nearly fainted as the image entered his mind.
Five out of Daphne's eight brothers have appeared on the show; unfortunately, few of them maintained consistency with Daphne's Northern accent. LaPaglia, an Australian actor, faked a Cockney (London) accent, while Robbie Coltrane, who is Scottish, played Daphne's brother Michael with a muddled Brummy (Birmingham) accent. Most of the brothers are portrayed as lawless, alcoholic ne'er-do-wells and womanizers, except for Billy, who is implied to be gay, such as in the episode Daphne's Room, in which Daphne said "All of my brothers would peek at me in the shower, all of them! Except for Billy that is..." When Daphne talks with her mom Gertrude about resuming her sex life with Niles after his heart surgery, Gertrude tells her to "use your feminine wiles - that’s how your brother Billy landed Kevin." According to Daphne, Billy rejected the family's traditional fishing background by announcing that he "hated the smell of fish, and was going to teach ballroom dancing." Daphne also has an uncle who lives in San Francisco, and who is said to be both a priest and a transvestite. 
David Mixner (born August 16, 1946) is a civil rights activist and best-selling author. He is best known for his work in anti-war and gay rights advocacy. 
David Benjamin Mixner was born on August 16, 1946, near the town of Elmer in southern New Jersey. His father Ben worked on a corporate farm, and his mother Mary worked shifts at a local glass factory and later took a job as a bookkeeper for the local John Deere dealership. David has two older siblings, Patsy Mixner Annison and Melvin Mixner. 
Mixner attended Daretown Elementary School, then Woodstown High School, where he got involved in the Civil Rights movement, by participating in picketing and sending his own money to Martin Luther King, Jr. In his bestselling memoir, Stranger Among Friends, Mixner explains that his parents were “livid” over his involvement in the Civil Rights movement, claiming his activism embarrassed them. When Mixner told them he wanted to go south during the summer of 1963 after following the events in Birmingham, Alabama, his parents forbade him.
In the fall of 1964, Mixner enrolled at Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona, where he soon became heavily involved in civil rights and anti-war activism, including helping to organize protests against a speech by General William Westmoreland. Prompted by an article he read in The Arizona Republic about city garbage workers who were seeking the right to unionize, in the fall of 1966, Mixner organized from start to finish the first of many protests he would organize over the next thirty years. Mixner rallied hundreds of workers, students and professors and led a march on City Hall. Although the city successfully broke the strike, the workers eventually earned the right to unionize. 
Mixner also experienced his first same-sex relationship at ASU, with a man whom he refers to as Kit in his memoirs. A year into their relationship, Kit was killed in an automobile accident. Mixner did not attend the funeral, and Kit’s parents never discovered that their son was gay. 
Soon after Kit’s death, Mixner decided to transfer to the University of Maryland in order to be closer to Washington, D.C., where he would be able to get more involved in anti-war protests.
Mixner found himself much more interested in activism than in pursuing a college degree. While at Maryland, Mixner was a grassroots organizer for the 1967 march on the Pentagon, which was later captured in Norman Mailer’s Armies of the Night.
Later that year, Mixner dropped out of college and began working for the presidential campaign of Eugene McCarthy. One of Mixner’s first assignments was organizing the Minnesota operation, helping McCarthy win the Minnesota caucus, defeating incumbent President Lyndon B. Johnson. Later, Mixner and other members of McCarthy’s campaign team went to Georgia to help select an alternative delegation to send to the national convention in Chicago, challenging Governor Lestor Maddox’s hand-picked delegation, which included only seven African-Americans in the 117 person delegation. The Georgia Democratic Party Forum, which sought to challenge Maddox’s delegation, held its own convention in Macon, where Congressman John Conyers (D–MI) keynoted their convention before turning over the floor to Julian Bond, the first African-American elected to the Georgia legislature, who would later become Chairman of the NAACP.
At the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, Mixner was beaten by police during the protests held outside the convention center. After Humphrey claimed the nomination, Mixner began seeking out new outlets for his activism. He soon befriended Doris Kearns Goodwin, who introduced Mixner to Senator Ted Kennedy, who would become a lifelong friend.
In early 1969, Mixner was invited to join the Delegate Selection Committee, which had been created during the 1968 Democratic National Convention. Although Mixner’s appointment turned out to be a mistake, as Senator Fred R. Harris of Oklahoma was supposed to invite Mixner to join the less powerful Rules Committee, he nonetheless made his mark on the twenty-eight member body, which included Warren Christopher, who would later become Secretary of State, Senator Birch Bayh of Indiana, Senator Harold Hughes of Iowa, Senator Adlai Stevenson III of Illinois and Senator George McGovern of South Dakota, who served as the Committee’s Chairman.
By virtue of his inadvertent inclusion on the Delegate Selection Committee, Mixner served as his generation’s lone voice, and he intended the use the platform to raise the issue of the violence at the previous year’s convention. When Senator Kennedy, a close friend of Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley and the party’s front-runner for the 1972 Presidential nomination, took the witness stand, Mixner used the opportunity to ask Kennedy if he would publicly condemn both the tactics used by the Chicago police and the Mayor for his involvement. Kennedy dodged the question. Subsequently, Adlai Stevenson III sought to exclude Mixner from a committee meeting in Chicago where Mayor Daley was scheduled to testify. McGovern called Mixner, asking him not to attend, but Mixner refused. When he arrived for the meeting, drawing the ire of Senator Stevenson, McGovern offered him a compromise, promising to ask Daley to apologize for the violence and offer all those arrested amnesty if Mixner agreed to stay quiet. The resulting exchange between McGovern and Daley, included Daley’s insistence that "If people violate the law they should accept the consequences of the law." 
The McGovern Commission, which had set out to reform the Presidential nomination process in order to avoid a repeat of the 1968 Convention, eventually issued its recommendations, including the requirement that all delegates be directly elected by the people, eviscerating the power of political bosses to control the nomination process. 
Mixner’s most significant contribution to the anti-Vietnam War effort was his role as one of the head organizers of the Moratorium to End the War in Vietnam. The idea was prompted by Jerome Grossman, a Massachusetts businessman active in the peace movement. Grossman proposed to Sam Brown, a close friend of Mixner, that they set aside a day in 1969 where “business as usual” would come to a halt, essentially engaging in a strike against everything. Brown decided that the word “moratorium” would be less threatening than “strike” to middle-class Americans, and set to work, setting aside October 15, 1969 as the day of the moratorium. Brown soon enlisted the help of Mixner, David Hawk, another young activist, and Marge Sklencar, who they knew from the McCarthy campaign. Brown, Mixner, Hawk and Sklencar then set about organizing the event.
In September 1969, shortly before the Moratorium, Mixner headed to Martha’s Vineyard to meet with fellow activists, many of whom had also worked on the McCarthy campaign. Among those in attendance was Bill Clinton, who had been invited by one of Mixner’s friends. At the time, Clinton was studying at Oxford on a Rhodes Scholarship, attending the Martha’s Vineyard retreat with fellow Rhodes Scholars Rick Stearns and Strobe Talbott. Mixner and Clinton were fast friends, and Mixner would play a significant role twenty-three years later in getting the LGBT community to support Clinton. 
As the date of the Moratorium approached, it began gathering a great deal of momentum, with Time, Life, and Newsweek magazines featuring it in cover stories. When Clinton subsequently visited the headquarters of the Moratorium and saw what he would be missing by being in London on October 15, he suggested to Mixner that he organize a parallel protest at Oxford. This protest, in which about a thousand people gathered in front of the American embassy in London, would later be a significant issue in his presidential campaign, with President George H. Bush telling Larry King on CNN in October 1992, "Maybe I'm old-fashioned, but to go to a foreign country and demonstrate against your own country when your sons and daughters are dying halfway around the world, I am sorry but I think that is wrong."
The Moratorium drew millions of people throughout the country, who gathered in public places and read the names of the soldiers killed in Vietnam aloud. The day was capped off by a march at the Washington Monument, where Coretta Scott King, the widow of Martin Luther King, Jr., spoke about her late husband’s passion for ending the war.
In 1976, Mixner began the process of coming out of the closet, and soon thereafter was a founding member of the Municipal Elections Committee of Los Angeles (MECLA), the nation’s first gay and lesbian Political Action Committee. At the time, very few candidates were willing to accept donations from openly gay individuals or gay-affiliated organizations. At the time, Mixner was also serving as the campaign manager for Tom Bradley, the mayor of Los Angeles who was seeking reelection, so while he worked to raise funds for MECLA, his involvement was kept secret because of the potential for his sexuality to become an issue in Bradley’s campaign.
Soon after Bradley won reelection easily, Mixner turned his focus to fighting Proposition 6, an initiative placed on the California ballot by Orange County State Senator John Briggs that would make it illegal for gays and lesbians to be schoolteachers. Similar initiatives had recently passed throughout the country when Mixner turned his focus to fighting Proposition 6, creating the “NO on 6” organization to fight it; through the process, he would publicly come out of the closet. Mixner and his lover Peter Scott secured a meeting with then-Governor Ronald Reagan, whom they convinced to oppose the initiative publicly. As a result, and through the work of Mixner, Scott, legendary gay rights activist and San Francisco City Councilman Harvey Milk, and others, Proposition 6 was defeated by over a million votes, the first ballot initiative of its sort to be shot down. 
As a result of this huge success, Mixner and Scott experienced a huge upturn in business for their fledgling political consulting firm, Mixner/Scott, and were asked by Bill Clinton, then running for governor of Arkansas, to host a reception for Clinton at their Los Angeles home.
In late 1984, after years of devastation in his personal life resulting from the AIDS crisis, Mixner decided to focus his energy on combating nuclear proliferation, creating an organization named PRO Peace. Mixner envisioned finding five thousand Americans who would take a year out of their lives to walk across America to advocate for disarmament, holding rallies throughout the country. 
The Great Peace March for Global Nuclear Disarmament, which Mixner would later call his “biggest political failure and his biggest regret” ultimately left Los Angeles on March 1, 1986 with only 1200 marchers. Mixner would spend many years paying the consequences, which included fighting lawsuits and paying employment taxes for his employees. The lore of the march lives on, however, immortalized in songs, books, and film.
Shortly after Mixner experienced professional success in 1985, helping defeat Proposition 64, a ballot initiative proposed by Lyndon LaRouche that would require quarantining people with AIDS, Mixner learned that his long-time lover and business partner, Peter Scott, had AIDS. Scott would fight the disease for four years; he died on May 13, 1989. While Scott fought the disease, Mixner formed an organization that spearheaded legislation that would create a California alternative to the FDA, enabling California to deal more aggressively with the AIDS epidemic than the federal government. Mixner’s group enlisted the support of California Attorney General John Van de Kamp, then convinced Governor George Deukmejian to sign AB 1952, which, as described by van de Kamp, “mandates the director of DHS to implement the drug testing and sale authority that he had under existing law, for the purpose of approving the testing and sale either of an AIDS vaccine, or of new drugs that offer a reasonable possibility of treating people who have been infected with the AIDS virus.” 
Four years after a fundraiser for the Dukakis campaign told Mixner that Governor Dukakis would not accept the million dollars Mixner and his friends planned to raise for him, Mixner found hope in the candidacy of his old friend, Bill Clinton. After Clinton promised Mixner that he would support both an end to the ban on gays in the military and increased funds to find a cure for AIDS, Mixner began raising money for Clinton enthusiastically. Mickey Kantor, Clinton’s campaign chairman, soon asked Mixner to join the National Executive Committee of the Clinton for President campaign, the first openly gay person to become a public face of a presidential campaign. 
After Clinton was elected, Mixner helped with the transition team, though he publicly declared that he would not seek an appointment with the new administration. Although he spoke at an event at the inaugural ball, introduced by his old friend Ted Kennedy, Mixner soon thrust himself in the middle of the furor over the “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy proposed by Clinton, which represented a total betrayal to Mixner and many in the gay community. 
When Mixner went on Nightline to complain about Clinton’s rapid shift away from allowing gays and lesbians to serve openly in the military, his calls to the White House stopped being returned and his consulting business began to tank, as he was no longer perceived as someone who had influence with the new administration. 
Shortly thereafter, Mixner participated in a march in Washington for the Campaign for Military Service, which advocated lifting the bans on gays in the military. When Clinton announced the “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy on July 19, 1993, Mixner organized a march with CMS and was very publicly arrested outside the White House, for which he received a great deal of publicity because of his personal relationship with Clinton. Mixner and Clinton later healed the rift, but Clinton never again revisited the policy during his Presidency.
David is the bestselling author of Stranger Among Friends, an autobiography published in 1996, and Brave Journeys: Profiles in Gay and Lesbian Courage, published in 2001.
On November 3, 2005, the Yale University Library officially created the David Benjamin Mixner collection, which houses his personal collection of books, papers, films and other materials relating to his involvement in civil rights issues.
In 2006, Mixner moved to Turkey Hollow in Sullivan County, New York, where he lived in a bright yellow house with his two cats, Sheba and Uganda. In 2009, Mixner moved to Hell's Kitchen in New York City. He posts blog entries daily on his website, davidmixner.com. His home was recently featured in the Real Estate section of the New York Times in an article entitled, "Do Ask, Do Tell." David is the keynote speaker for the Empire State Pride Agenda's 2007 fall dinner. In 2009, Mixner moved back to New York City, where he currently resides. 
In May 2009, Mixner used his blog to call for a March on Washington to protest the LGBT community's lack of equal rights. Cleve Jones, spurred by Mixner's call to march, led the organizational efforts for the National Equality March, scheduled for October 10-11, 2009. Mixner and Jones both will be featured speakers at a rally in front of the Capitol after the March. Over 200,000 people marched on Washington on October 11th, 2009.
Mixner was featured in "Ask Not" (2008), a documentary film about the "don't ask, don't tell" policy. 
Donna Parker is the lead character of a seven-volume girls' series that was written by Marcia Martin from the 1950s through the 1960s.
First published by Whitman from 1957 through 1964 in thick glossy picture cover editions, the series was revamped with new cover art in the late 1960s and then reprinted with a smaller, non-glossy picture cover. The series was discontinued by the mid-1970s.
But Donna has recently gained a bit of fame in the 21st century. The book "Donna Parker, Special Agent" is included in an exhibit at The Newseum in Washington, D.C. The Newseum, which displays all manner of news media memorabilia and artifacts, has a current exhibition titled "G-Men and Journalists," featuring prominent spy capers and crime stories. Donna's cheerful face and waving hand are front and center along with other books in the display. A photo of the display appeared in the Washington Post Sunday Magazine on April 26, 2009. 
Donna Parker is a 14 year old girl living with her family in Summerfield, a small town located two hours from New York City. She is a pretty girl with dark hair and brown eyes. 
Donna is an excellent student who excels at English. She regularly receives A's on her report card, serves on class committees and in "Special Agent" joins the editorial team of the Summerfield Junior High newspaper. She is a popular student with teachers and peers alike.
Calm, loyal and understanding, Donna is prone to worry about events outside her control. She is quick to help people and very polite. 
She is responsible but often receives lectures from her mother on everything from eating a healthy breakfast to being more compassionate to others. 
Donna also regularly lectures her younger brother on his speech, grammar and behavior. 
Fredricka (Ricky) West is Donna's best friend. Red-haired and freckled, Ricky and Donna are quite different but have a close bond. Ricky is dreamy, romantic and melodramatic. She is also a good student and has a passion for acting and drama. 
Though Ricky and Donna are close, as they grow up they begin to go their separate ways more often, especially when they clash about how they like to spend their free time in "Special Agent" and "Takes a Giant Step".
Grace Parker is Donna's mother. She was a schoolteacher and now a full time housewife. She is social, patient and caring. She tends to lecture Donna but also is a good shoulder for Donna to cry on. 
She is an excellent cook who enjoys playing cards, reading and socializing with friends and through her discussion groups. She is a wonderful seamstress and regularly sews Donna beautiful clothes and dresses. 
Sam Parker is Donna's father. He is a salesman and has an excellent sense of humor. He likes to tease Donna, especially about boys. He is always very proud of Donna and her achievements. 
James (Jimmy) Parker is Donna's younger brother. He is outgoing, playful and active. He is good at sports, loves baseball, basketball and football and plays noisy "war" games which annoy Donna. He also makes fun of, and teases, his older sister. His best friend is Skipper Gray who lives next door to the Parkers. 
Richard (Paul) White is the friend and somewhat boyfriend of Donna. They went on some dates when he was a counselor at Camp Three Pines and she was a junior counselor at the nearby Camp Cherrydale. They also dated during "A Spring to Remember". Known as Richard up until "A Spring to Remember", Richard had been using his middle name but decided to revert back to his birth name of Paul. He is handsome, intelligent and popular. He is a year older than Donna and briefly left school to pursue full time work on the assumption his family was struggling financially because of his father's unemployment. 
Joyce Davenport is a classmate of Donna's. Initially she is considered to be arrogant, aloof and cold but following an accident, Donna gets to know the real Joyce and finds her a sweet, shy, caring girl. Joyce is highly intelligent and is very interested in journalism, most likely due to the fact her father is the editor of the Summerfield newspaper.
Anne Franklin is a friend of Donna's from school. She is tall and blonde and has a good sense of humor. She loves animals and plays practical jokes. 
Tommy Sheridan is a classmate of Donna's. He is smart with a flair for designing helicopters. His father owns a helicopter factory and Tommy was the target of spies because of his clever designs in "Secret Agent".
Roger Norcross is Grace Parker's long-lost brother. He ran away as a teenager and the Norcross family heard very little of him afterwards. He appeared in "Special Agent", later marrying Donna's teacher and heading back to his home in Hollywood. In "Spring to Remember" Roger promised Donna a holiday in California if she got straight As on her report card. Donna later visited Roger and his wife, Adele, during the book "In Hollywood".
Adele Norcross (née Fischer) is a teacher of Donna's from "Secret Agent." She is young and friendly. She assisted with the running of the school newspaper and organized the trip to New York for the newspaper staff. Roger Norcross and Adele fell in love and arranged to be married in "Secret Agent". 
The Stackhouse Family are family friends of the Parkers. They are first introduced in "Takes a Giant Step" when the Parker family holiday in Canada. The Stackhouses later move to Summerfield and their son, Jeff, stays temporarily with the Parker family in order to attend school at the start of the term while his parents arrange to move.
Mr and Mrs West are Ricky's parents. Mr West is formal and old-fashioned. Mrs West is sweet natured. 
Mr Greer is the Principal of Summerfield Junior High. 
Marjorie Dengrove is a teacher whom Sam and Grace Parker arranged to stay at the Parker residence when they traveled to Europe and India. She is young and from a wealthy family. 
George Hart is a classmate of Donna's. He was elected school "Mayor" in "Secret Agent". He is considered very handsome, smart and popular by his classmates. 
Amy Alexander is a friend of Donna's from Camp Arawak. Amy is very smart and shy. She doesn't make friends easily and gets very nervous around boys. She has red hair and freckles and at first Donna mistook her for Ricky. 
Thornton "Teddy" Bair is a boy who was a counselor at Caribe, a camp for boys located near Arawak. He is charming and handsome but also a gossip with little sense of responsibility. 
Jennifer Bruestle lives next door to Mr and Mrs Norcross in California. She is the same age as Donna and the two become friends. Jennifer desperately wants to be an artist and feels that her parents are not very supportive. Jennifer has a younger brother who is Jimmy's age. 
Linda Atkinson is a wealthy girl from Hollywood who is the same age as Donna. Adele Norcross arranged for Linda and Donna to catch up during Donna's holiday. Linda invites Donna to her mansion and elaborate party. Donna and Linda are friendly but don't have much in common. 
Bruce Maslin is a dashing boy Donna meets on her way to visit her Uncle and Aunt in Hollywood. He is charming, amusing and good-looking. However, his lack of responsibility gets Donna into trouble on a few occasions during "In Hollywood".
Mike Langley is a studious friend of Linda Atkinson. He is introduced during Donna's visit to California during "In Hollywood". He is very intelligent and hard-working. Donna enjoys his company, finding him reliable and interesting but not particularly fun. 
Ellie Townshead is Bunny Knight's cousin. She is also a bridesmaid with Donna in "Spring to Remember". Donna and Ellie did not get along particularly well in "Spring to Remember", especially after Donna overhears Ellie making fun of her with one of the groomsmen. However, during the book "In Hollywood", Donna and Ellie seem to get along better as they make arrangements to catch up in California. Ellie is an aspiring ballerina, very pretty and delicate. 
Donna Parker at Cherrydale (1957)
Donna and Ricky take jobs as junior counselors at Camp Cherrydale, a summer camp for young children run by Dr and Mrs Duvall. 
As junior counselors, Donna and Ricky immerse themselves in camp life, enjoying meeting new people, getting to know their young charges, running activities and soaking up the lovely surroundings of the camp.
However, camp life is not all fun and games. Donna's senior counselor, Bunny, is acting very strangely, Dr and Mrs Duvall seem to be hiding something, Nancy, a young girl from Summerfield is causing problems at the camp and a mysterious house in the nearby woods has Donna and Ricky intrigued. 
Donna Parker Special Agent (1957)
The summer is over and it is time for Donna and Ricky to go back to Summerfield Junior High. 
Donna and Ricky go their separate ways more often as Ricky pursues her dramatic talents whilst Donna joins the school newspaper, quickly becoming elected as assistant editor.
Things take a turn for the mysterious when her long-lost uncle appears in Summerfield, her friend, Tommy Sheridan, thinks he is being spied on, Donna's friends begin to ignore her and a strange character, Mr Brown, is employed at Summerfield Junior High.
Little does Donna realise that an exciting trip to New York City will reunite her with old friends and solve all of the mysteries.
Donna Parker On Her Own (1957)
Donna's parents are offered the trip of a lifetime Europe and India the only catch is that Donna and Jimmy cannot travel with them. 
A number of options are examined but finally it is decided that a young teacher from Jimmy's school will stay at the Parker family home and look after Donna and Jimmy until Mr and Mrs Parker return.
With less rules to worry about, Donna enjoys her new-found sense of independence; however, she learns that independence comes with some big responsibilities and new worries. 
Donna Parker A Spring to Remember (1960)
It's springtime in Summerfield and Donna is enjoying her last term at Summerfield Junior High. 
With a diary full of dates with former class President, Richard White, an invitation to be a bridesmaid in New York, a trip to Hollywood on offer and final exams, Donna is on cloud nine but one sad event will change Donna's whole outlook and Ricky's life forever.
Donna Parker In Hollywood (1961)
Donna Parker is off to Hollywood! Staying with her Aunt and Uncle in glamorous Hollywood is the trip of a lifetime for Donna.
An exciting plane trip, dashing boys, movie studios, parties and a mysterious neighbor are all waiting for Donna as she spends time with her Aunt and Uncle and tours California.
It is not long before Donna learns some important lessons, in particular, the importance of looking beneath the surface. 
Donna Parker Mystery at Arawak (1962) 
After her exciting trip to California, Donna takes a job as a junior counselor at Camp Arawak for the remainder of her summer.
At first Donna finds camp life hard - Arawak is very different from Cherrydale, she doesn't know anyone, her charges are diverse and lively and her senior counselor seems to be hiding something.
However, Donna soon gets accustomed to camp life, meeting new friends, taking on new tasks and helping run the Drama department at the camp. 
Whilst different from Cherrydale, Arawak has its share of mysteries and it doesn't take long for Donna to get caught up in the strange events at Arawak. 
Donna Parker Takes a Giant Step (1964). 
Donna's family enjoy the last week of their summer vacation by heading to Canada for a few days to catch up with some old family friends, the Stackhouses.
Celebration ensues when the Stackhouses announce they will be moving to Summerfield and their son, Jeff, travels back with the Parker's to commence school at the start of the term.
Living with her brother and Jeff makes Donna's life problematic as she tries to immerse herself at her new school, try out for the cheerleading squad, deal with a friend moving away and meeting new people. 
However, life is problematic for many in Summerfield with teenage parties getting out of control but it appears that Jeff may hold the answer. 
São Paulo is the 10th richest city in the world, and is expected to be the 6th richest in 2025. According to data of IBGE, its gross domestic product (GDP) in 2006 was R$ 282,852,338,000, equivalent to approximately 12.26% of the Brazilian GDP and 36% of all production of goods and services of the State of São Paulo. 
The biggest financial center in Brazil and one of the biggest finacional centers in the world, São Paulo's economy is going through a deep transformation. Once a city with a strong industrial character, São Paulo's economy has become increasingly based on the tertiary sector, focusing on services and businesses for the country. The city is also unique among Brazilian cities for its large number of foreign corporations. Many analysts point to São Paulo as an important global city, even though this assignment can be criticized considering its serious problems of social exclusion and spacial segregation. Although being the most important financial centre of the country, São Paulo also presents a high degree of informality in its economy.
São Paulo is the business center of the Mercosur economy. Acclaimed as a city of business tourism, attracting today's biggest and most important international events, be they in the economic, cultural, scientific or sporting area. It holds more than 200 events per day, offering more than 250 thousand square meters of space in pavilions and areas for congresses and fairs. This is without taking into account the supply of spaces within hotels, which adds another 70 thousand square meters, suitable for holding events. According to the International Congress and Convention Association (ICCA) that ranks the greatest event centers in the world, São Paulo is the most important destination for international events in the Americas. São Paulo is also among Top 20 destinations for events in the world and left behind destinations like Madrid, Sydney, Athens and Vancouver. Adding space in nightclubs, cultural and business areas, clubs and other alternatives to these numbers, São Paulo boasts approximately 430,000 square meters for the holding of any type of event. 
There is still the supply of approximately 30,000 apartments of various categories, a number which is to grow significantly in the next two years, predicted to reach 50,000 apartments in 2003, catering for those seeking the more luxurious options of the large chains, to simpler and more economical options. It is worth pointing out that from the tourist attractions the following stand out: gastronomy and culture. With more than 12,000 restaurants of more than 40 different world cuisines, besides the 70 museums, more than 200 cinemas, around 50 theaters, art galleries and cultural centers, São Paulo has one of the liveliest night-lives in the world.
If the city of São Paulo were a country, its economy would be the 47th in the world, bigger than Egypt and Kuwait, for example, about the same size as Hungary, New Zealand or Israel. The economy of the city of São Paulo would also be bigger than 22 U.S. States, such as Hawaii and New Hampshire. 
In 2005, the city of São Paulo collected R$ 90 billion in taxes, and the city budget was R$ 15 billion; these figures show that São Paulo contributes to redistribution of wealth. The city has 1,500 bank branches. There are 70 shopping malls. Of all the international companies with business in Brazil, 63% have their head offices in São Paulo. According to Mystery Shopping International, the Oscar Freire Street is the eighth most luxurious in the world. 
A connected city, always in the vanguard of the greatest cultural movements that changed Brazilian behavior and habits. In higher education, the University of São Paulo (USP) is in the top 100 public universities in the world and, recently, in the annual raking of the British newspaper The Times, as the first university in South America. There is also a wide range of short courses, lectures, seminars, literary discussions and a several universities and cultural centers teaching from handicraft to technology.
The São Paulo Stock Exchange (BM&F Bovespa) is Brazil's official stock and bonds exchange. The BM&F Bovespa is the largest stock exchange in Latin America and third largest in the world. In the Stock Exchange, R$ 6 billion (US$ 3.5 billion) change hands every day. If the Greater São Paulo were a country would be the thirty-third richest nation in the world (in Nominal GDP), ahead of the United Arab Emirates and Hong Kong for example and twenty-eighth richest nation ahead of Belgium and Venezuela (in GDP PPP). São Paulo is the best city to do business in Latin America. The large growth of São Paulo GDP is due to the great economic potential of the city and the appreciation of the Brazilian real to the U.S. dollar. The per capita income for the city was R$ 25,675 (2006).
According to PricewaterhouseCoopers annual economic growth of the city is 4.2%.
Industrial development, beginning in the late 19th century but intensifying after World War II, has transformed metropolitan São Paulo into the foremost industrial centre in Latin America. The city has outgrown its status as the "Chicago of South America," because it actually plays a greater role in Brazilian commerce and industry than any one city in the United States. The value of its industrial production is by far the largest of any Brazilian city. Its leading industries produce textiles, mechanical and electrical appliances, furniture, foodstuffs, and chemical and pharmaceutical products. Heavy metallurgical plants located in nearby Taubaté, oil refineries and chemical plants in Cubatão, and plants manufacturing motor vehicles, transportation equipment, and farm machinery in Santo André, São Bernardo do Campo, São Caetano do Sul, and Diadema make large contributions to production. Computer industries and the manufacturing of electrical appliances are on the rise, as are automobile components. The several thousand manufacturing establishments in São Paulo provide employment for more than one-tenth of the population.
Commerce, both wholesale and retail, is well developed and spread over the city by zones according to specialty, for example, the wholesale garment district in Bom Retiro and Brás. Banks are concentrated in the central Triângulo, as well as along Paulista Avenue, but maintain branches in almost every district. All but the smallest Brazilian banks also represent interests from North America and South America, Europe, Asia, and Africa. São Paulo Stock Exchange has taken on global significance, and diversified financial services rival those of other world centres. No less important in terms of employment are street vending, peddling, and neighbourhood stores. Yet huge shopping malls have sprung up near residential neighbourhoods, and new service industries spawned by the computer age provide increasing employment opportunities for the great number of graduates produced by São Paulo's many universities and technical institutes.

The socialist administration of Bolivian President Evo Morales has not always had a good relationship with the Bolivian hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church. This has become a problem for Morales as polls taken in the early 2000s indicate that 77% of the Bolivian population say they are Catholic, meaning that about seven million of the nine million Bolivians follow the Roman Catholic faith. When faced with a Morales policy that they disagree with, Catholic Bishops of Bolivia are able to inspire large demonstrations against the measures. The Catholic Church draws most of its support from the cities, and little from the higher rural areas (where Morales draws his main support) due to "a lack of resources and to indigenous cultural resistance to Church efforts to replace traditional attitudes". Morales has stated that he is a Catholic,, he like many rural Bolivians was raised with a combination of Catholicism and belief in "the Pachamama or Mother Earth figure, as well as on Ekeko, a traditional indigenous god of luck, harvests, and general abundance". Other indigenous leaders like Felix Patzi (see below) follow a pure indigenous faith and "discard all forms of Christianity; however, this effort has not led to a significant increase in the number of "indigenous-belief only" worshippers."
The special place given to Catholicism in Bolivia can be seen in Article 3 of the Bolivian constitution, which says, “The State recognizes and sustains the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion. It guarantees the public exercise of all other faiths. Relations with the Catholic Church shall be governed by concordats and agreements between the Bolivian State and the Holy See.” The United States State Department has characterized this as "the Constitution recognizes it Catholicism as the official religion", a statement that the comments of Bolivian Bishops (see below) would seem to disagree with.
On June 18, 2006, the Archbishop of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Cardinal Julio Terrazas, addressed the rumors that congressional candidates to the Bolivian parliament were saying that the Catholic Church was demanding to be made the official religion of Bolivia. In his Sunday sermon the cardinal assured people that they were “not seeking or fighting to achieve such a goal”. He pointed out that the bishops had until recently been open to reviewing the Bolivian constitution’s article that granted special recognition to the role of Catholicism. The cardinal said, “They keep saying we are fighting for that article. Not so! Let it be reviewed, but let it be done intelligently and fully. Let’s not deny that this country has truly received the seeds of the Kingdom of justice and of truth that the Lord has brought, and that that has been part of her history, and that is why in so many parts of Bolivia we are proud to be Catholics.” The cardinal pointed out that Catholicism had stopped being the official state religion of Bolivia since 1967 and said the Church is merely asking for “respect” and “recognition of the work she has done.” He said those who are calling for secularism “are hiding their other intentions” to strip Bolivia of religion and “order a country in such a way that God is not present.”
In early June, 2006 the socialist party of Evo Morales (Movimiento al Socialismo) seized lands adjacent to a Marian Shrine in Copacabana. These lands where originally given to the shrine decades ago by the Bolivian government so that income derived by use of the land would help support the shrine. At the seizure party loyalists declared that they were taking only the “unproductive lands of the Church”, and the land was divided into seven lots and several trees were cut down. Father Obermaier, in charge of the shrine called for the government to resolve the situation.
On July 27, 2006 while the education reform controversy was ongoing (see below) the Socialist Senator Antonio Peredo joined with other members of Morales’ ''Movimiento al Socialismo'' in the Bolivian Parliament to call for an end of recognizing Catholic feast days such as Corpus Christi and All Saints Day as national holidays. The suggested policy was to only recognize Holy Week and Christmas. For the nationally recognized holidays to change the policy would have to be approved by the full Parliament.
In early June 2006, Bolivian Education Minister Felix Patzi working under President Evo Morales declared that “education will emphatically be secular and no longer Catholic. Religion classes will now be optional instead of obligatory. There will be a course on the history of religions: indigenous, Arabic, or Catholic.” The reform called for “secular education that respects the beliefs, the spirituality of indigenous and native nations and of the Bolivian nations as the basis of individual and communitarian rights.” The Bolivian Roman Catholic hierarchy immediately opposed this proposal and saw it as an attack on religion in Bolivia they were outspoken against the measure and organized protests against it.
In June 2006 Minister Felix Patzi (a sociologist of Aymara Indian descent who practices "a pre-Columbian religion that worships the earth goddess") brought organizational opposition against the Morales governments' ideas when he declared that "Catholicism would no longer be ‘the official’ religion taught at schools." Patzi’s said that he wanted to end the “the religious monopoly” of the Catholic faith in schools and allow all faith to be taught “from oriental religions to those practiced by our native peoples.” He said he would end the policy that makes Catholic religious classes obligatory for students, and called the existing system “colonial”. In an interview with the newspaper La Razon, Patzi said, “In Bolivia the people are not only Catholic, but also of other religious faiths.” He stated his fear of the issue “leading to confrontation among Bolivians”.
After protests by the Catholic hierarchy Patzi clarified that the sectarian Roman Catholic classes taught in state schools would be replaced with a "history of religions" class that would include a focus on traditional indigenous beliefs alongside Catholicism and other faiths practiced in Bolivia. Patzi said that “Catholicism would no longer be the ‘official religion’ of the country’s educational system.” The Morales government’s announced its policy as a call for “secular education that respects the beliefs, the spirituality of indigenous and native nations and of the Bolivian nations as the basis of individual and communitarian rights.” It was announced that the proposal would come before the National Assembly for a vote on August 6, 2006.
Immediately after Patzi's statements Archbishop Tito Solari of Cochabamba said the Morales government must be consistent when it talks about respecting beliefs, which “implies respecting the Catholic beliefs of the majority of Bolivians.” He defended the existence of “Covenant schools” which are administered by the hierarchy of the Catholic Church, but are paid for by Bolivian taxes drawn from both Catholics and non-Catholics alike. Solari said “Parents are the first and foremost educators of their children, therefore they have the right to choose the kind of education they want. …families are very appreciative of the schools that are administered by the Church, which serve the community and, in a special way, those in need.” He defined what he thought was the proper role of the government saying, “The state and the institutions of civil society can contribute, in a democratic atmosphere, to people choosing the best educational model for the integral and critical formation of persons.”
In mid-June, 2006 a spokeswoman for the Bolivian Bishops’ Committee on Education demanded that the Morales government clarify its position on religious instruction in state schools. She said, “We are anxious, not out of fear but out of concern, that the government define its position in order to begin dialogue.” She took issue with Patzi labeling the current system as “colonialist”, saying he “is ignoring the Church’s contribution to culture, education, health care and development in Bolivia.” She pointed out that the Church respects other beliefs and is not asking for Catholicism to be forced upon the people. She accused the socialist Morales government of having an anti-faith bias, “I think the problem is not with the Church, but with the faith of the people who are 80% Catholic.”
Responding to Patzi's comments the Archbishop of Santa Cruz, Cardinal Julio Terrazas Sandoval, called for Bolivian Catholics to defend their faith he also called on President Morales to note “the difference between a lay State and a secular State that is hostile to religions. …the Catholic Church will defend the universal right to profess a religion. This is unrenounceable and non-negotiable. This is the basis for helping to form a family that is much more united in the cause of the kingdom of justice and peace and to build a country that is not in constant turmoil.” Bishop Jesus Juarez of El Alto accused the Morales government of using “double-speak” in its educational policies. After the Bishops statements Morales stressed that “religion courses would not be eliminated from public schools”.
In July 10–15, 2006 in Sucre, Bolivia during a meeting of the National Educational Congress delegates from the Bishops’ Conference of Bolivia walked out claiming it “had become political and exclusive… the government is seeking to impose its new education law, which reflects an attitude that prevents dialogue about certain aspects of the future of education in Bolivia.” Education Minister Felix Patzi spoke with several Bishops in a late-night meeting and pledged to uphold religious instruction in schools and respect the Church-State agreement, saying “We recognize the contribution of the Church in the area of education, technical formation, and other areas. Religious subject matter will respect the diversity of religions and that is something we share with the Church, everyone has the right to practice the diversity of other religions, there was never any disagreement on that.” Bishop Jesus Juarez of El Alto, who together with Auxiliary Bishop Luis Sainz of Cochabomba, said that not only do parochial schools have a fundamental right to offer instruction according to their own confession but that in state schools “the parents should be able to choose which type of religious instruction their children will receive.” Bishop Sainz demanded the Morales government “clarify and come up with a consensus about the concept of secular education so that there are no longer any doubts.” At the end of its conference the National Educational Congress led by Patzi approved a resolution saying, “Education in Bolivia is secular and pluralistic because it respects the spirituality of each culture and freedom of belief, it promotes its own values, and rejects every type of dogmatisms.” They called for the "curricula to be adapted in accord with the diverse beliefs of the country". While before Patzi had stated that the policy would only go into effect after its consideration by the Bolivian Parliament, after the Educational Congress approved the measure he declared that its conclusions "were binding and would be implemented immediately." This drew another wave of protests from Bolivian Catholics who demanded Patzi's resignation.
Archbishop Tito Solari described the Morales government's actions at the event as operating “in a Communist fashion, the government imposed its ideology without any room for dialogue.” After the Bishops delegates had left those remaining approved the policy to expand the scope of the religious classes. Auxiliary Bishop Estanislao Dowlaszewicz of Santa Cruz characterized the results by saying “Today some people live as if they were allergic to religion or the Church… depicting it as a danger for the future of the country…they are trying to remove not only religion from the classroom, but God as well.” Archbishop Edmundo Abastoflor of La Paz made comments believed to be in response to the education question saying at a commemoration of Bolivian independence. In front of the attending Bolivian President Evo Morales, the archbishop declared, “It is crazy to think that God doesn’t exist or that we can forget about Him. …No matter how important we might be in this world, there is someone who is more so than us.”
In late July, 2006 Protestant theologian, Matias Preisweik, of the Ecumenical Higher Institute endorsed the new policy at a forum called “The State, Religion, and the New Political Constitution”. He said “in this moment of re-appreciation of things Andean, is there not the dream of having a country ruled by the values of its own ancestral and holistic religiosity?” He criticized the Catholic Church saying it “is recognized as the tutelary institution, like the Armed Forces, but in religious matters… and it portrays itself as a superior force that intercedes for Bolivians before the Kingdom of God.” He called for a greater separation of Church and State and cited the difficulties of those calling for legalizing abortion on demand as an example of Catholicism imposing its views. (The Catholic Church's position on abortion in Bolivia had recently gained international attention in 2000 when Bishop Jesus Juarez considered excommunicating Judge Juan Luis Ledezma for ignoring Church directives and ordering doctors to go ahead and allow a 12 year-old girl raped by her stepfather to have an abortion..)
Responding to Preisweik's comments Archbishop Edmundo Abastoflor of La Paz said that the Church “does not exercise or hold any political power and that her members live the vocation of service through educational and social works, in benefit of those in need.”
On July 23, 2006 Bolivia's Cardinal Julio Terrazas told Catholics they needed to stop being "passive" and defend the faith. He warned them that “Great wars began with small theories ... with this discourse of hate, rancor, of unforgiveness.” Patzi then came out against the Catholic hierarchy stating, "They are saying we are going to destroy the Church and its beliefs. How untrue! Excellencies, do not lie to the people, give them the whole truth, the hard truth. The truth does not destroy. Hypocrisy sooner or later will become visible.” By July 25, 2006 Catholic organizations had led street marches in cities including Santa Cruz and Tarija. After these protests Patzi went further in his claims, saying "The Church is now showing her true face. The Church is now on the side of the oligarchy, because for 514 years the Church has been at the service of the oligarchy and the rich. Nobody can deny it." Morales then came out in support of Patzi accusing the bishops of acting “as if this were the Inquisition.” He claimed that the bishops were “still seeking a certain vestige of power.” Morales explained his comments to reporters, saying "I want to ask the (church) hierarchies that they understand freedom of religion and beliefs in our country. It's not possible to impose their views. …I am worried by the behavior of some Catholic Church leaders who are acting like in times of the Inquisition."
In late July, 2006 Former Bolivian president, Jorge Quiroga (who lost the 2005 election to Evo Morales), criticized the remarks of President Morales which compared the actions of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in Bolivia with the Inquisition. Quiroga said “that such rhetoric should be avoided because it only brings negative consequences.” He declared he would champion the opposition against the government policies on religious classes, saying “Religion is an issue that should not be politicized. What we have clearly said (as the opposition) is that the teaching of religion be respected and we are going to defend it” 
The calls by the Catholic hierarchy to resist Morales’ policy against sectarian religious classes in state schools caused a dip in his popularity. In mid-July 2006 the newspaper La Razon did a survey of 1,009 Bolivians living in the country's four major cities. The survey showed Morales with an approval rating of 68 percent, down from 75 percent in June. It also found that 83 percent of Bolivians surveyed have a favorable opinion of the Catholic Church.
On July 30, 2006, after a 21 hour conference with Cardinal Julio Terrazas, Morales in the city of Cochabamba, ended the dispute by reversing his stance and backing away from the proposal. The Associated Press reported that in a joint statement “that mentioned religious diversity but made no provision for broadening the scope of the solely Catholic curriculum taught in Bolivia's schools”, both men said “The government and the Catholic church agree to preserve the course on religion, respecting the existing religious diversity in the country.”
In September 2006, the Confederation of Inner City Education Workers of Bolivia in a proposal called “Rescuing the Homeland” called for a law that would eliminate all religious instruction in state schools including the 200 state-funded covenant schools which are administered by the Catholic Church. The proposal said “Education should be secular, if we want it to be scientific.” The Catholic Church "warned that all of the advances made by the Church could be lost" if the State takes over the covenant schools and rallied to oppose any such proposals.
In August 2006, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Oruro, Cristobal Bialasik led thousands of Catholic students and parents through the city's streets demanding that the Morales government leave sectarian Catholic classes in the state schools. They also insisted that the government quash any suggestions toward amending the Bolivian Constitution’s official recognition of Roman Catholicism. The Bolivian Constitution (at article three) says, “The State recognizes and sustains the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman religion. It guarantees the public exercise of all other faiths. The relations with the Catholic Church shall be governed by concordats and agreements between the Bolivian State and the Holy See.” Bishop Bialasik stated that peace and unity will only come to Bolivia “if we respect our faith, if we respect God… and learn to live the values that He teaches us.” Auxiliary Bishop Luis Saenz of Cochabamba called on Catholics to protest knowing that “Bolivia is a country of one people devoted to the one true God and his Blessed Mother. Mary, under her different titles, wants all Bolivians to be united. …Let us pray that God will illumine the darkness in order to extinguish lies and deceit…because they want to silence us. God’s message is free. God gives us the strength to guide our people. The Catholic Church shall not be enslaved. She is not a slave to the government because she is not a political party. Fear not, Bolivia, because the Church is born of God.”
On January 18, 2007 Fr. Freddy del Villar, Vicar General of the Coroicu Diocese in Bolivia, said that the Catholic Church “remains vigilant” concerning the Socialist Morales government. He said they are still reserving judgement on the upcoming revision to the Bolivian constitution. He said, “The Church is worried, but at the same time optimistic about the new constitution the Morales government is preparing. Obviously, the party of Evo Morales is socialist: For example, it says it wants to have a non-confessional education, or that religion is not important. But let us see what comes out of the new constitution when it will be finished in August.” He declared that with factions in Bolivia seemingly attempting to disintegrate Bolivia, “The Church helps to maintain unity in the country.”

Food safety incidents in the People's Republic of China have received increased international media scrutiny following the reform and opening of the country, and its joining the World Trade Organization. Chinese people in urban areas have become more aware of food safety as their incomes rise. Food safety agencies in China have overlapping duties. The 2008 Chinese milk scandal received the most attention among food safety incidents.
Poisonous Jinhua ham In 2003, several small producers of Jinhua hams operated out of season and produced hams during warmer months, treating their hams with pesticides to prevent spoilage and insect infestation. The hams were soaked in the pesticide Dichlorvos, which is a volatile organophosphate insecticide used for fumigation.
Counterfeit baby formula In April 2004, at least 13 babies in Fuyang, Anhui and 50-60 more in the rural areas of the Anhui province died of malnourishment from ingesting fake milk powder. 100-200 other babies in Anhui Province suffered malnutrition but survived. Local officials in Fuyang arrested 47 people who were responsible for making and selling the fake formula and investigators discovered 45 types of substandard formula for sale in Fuyang markets. Over 141 factories were responsible for the production of the formula and Chinese officials seized 2,540 bags of fake formula by mid-April. The State Food and Drug Administration ordered an investigation in May, 2004.
The babies suffered from "big head disease" according to Chinese doctors. Within three days of ingesting the formula, the babies' heads swelled while their bodies became thinner from malnourishment. The fake formulas were tested to have only 1-6% protein when the national requirement was 10% protein. The government promised to compensate families and help cover medical bills. Most of the victims were rural families. 
Contaminated Longkou noodles In 2004, testing by Chinese authorities determined that some brands of cellophane noodles produced in Yantai, Shandong were contaminated with lead. It emerged that several unscrupulous companies had been making their noodles from cornstarch instead of mung beans in order to save costs, and, to make the cornstarch transparent, were adding lead-based whiteners to their noodles. In December 2006, Beijing authorities again inspected cellophane noodles produced by the Yantai Deshengda Longkou Vermicelli Co. Ltd. in Siduitou village, Zhangxing town, Zhaoyuan City, Yantai, this time determining that sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate, a toxic and possibly carcinogenic industrial bleach which is an illegal food additive in China, had been used in the production of the noodles. The company, which formerly sold its noodles both in China as well as overseas, was ordered to cease production and distribution. The company's website has since been shut down.
Adulterated pickled vegetables In June 2004, the Chengdu Quality Inspection Department released figures that only about 23% of all pickled vegetables produced in Chengdu had an acceptable amount of chemical additives. The labels on the pickled vegetables that was supposed to indicate the chemical content were also found to be inaccurate. In Sichuan, the factories had been using industrial-grade salt to pickle the vegetables and had been spraying pesticides containing high amounts of DDVP on the pickled vegetables before shipment.
Counterfeit alcoholic drinks In Spring 2004, four men died of alcohol poisoning in Guangdong Province and eight other men were hospitalized in the People's Hospital of Guangzhou. Wang Funian and Hou Shangjian, both from Taihe Town, died in May after drinking liquor bought from the same vendor. Two other men, one a migrant worker, died the previous night in Zhongluotan in Hunan Province. Authorities in the local health department suspected that the makers of the fake liquor blended industrial alcohol and rice wine, and closed several unlicensed liquor manufacturers. 
Soy sauce made from human hair Stories began circulating in the press about cheap soy sauces made from human hair. These sauces were manufactured in China using a chemical amino acid extraction process similar to artificially hydrolyzed soy sauces and then quietly exported to other countries. An investigative report that aired on Chinese television exposed the unsanitary and potentially contaminated sources of the hair:
In response, the Chinese government banned production of soy sauces made from hair. Other carcinogens remain, see 3-MCPD.
Sudan I Red Dye In 1996, China banned food manufacturers from using Sudan I red dye to color their products. China followed a number of other developed nations in banning the dye due to its links to cancer and other negative health effects. However, officials in the General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine, the State Bureau of Industry and Commerce, and the State Food and Drug Administration discovered in 2005 that Sudan I was being used in food in many major Chinese cities. In Beijing, the Heinz Company added the red dye to chili sauce; in Guangdong, Zhejiang, Hunan, and Fuzhou provinces, the red dye was discovered in vegetables and noodles. Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) used the red dye in its 1,200 restaurants, and medicine in Shanghai also contained Sudan I. 
Companies in China had been using Sudan I illegally for years before 2005, and government officials gave two reasons why the 1996 ban had not been adequately enforced. The first reason was that there were too many agencies overseeing food production, creating loopholes and inefficiency. The second reason was that the government agencies were not equipped or trained with the food testing equipment that could have detected the dye earlier. Officials announced that they would begin to reform the food safety system on national and local levels.
Counterfeit drugs The State Food and Drug Administration reported that their officials had resolved 14 cases involving fake drugs and 17 cases involving "health accidents" at drug manufacturing facilities. One of these incidents involved fake Armillarisni A; ten people injected with the fake drug died in May, 2006. The drug quality inspectors at the factory that produced the Armillarisni A drugs failed to notice that the chemical diglycol had been added to drugs. In July, 2006, six people died and 80 more became sick after ingesting an antibiotic with disinfectant as an ingredient. In 2006, the government also "revoked the business licenses of 160 drug manufacturers and retailers."
School food poisoning On September 1, 2006, more than 300 students at Chongzhou City Experimental Primary School in China's Sichuan Province got food poisoning after lunch. Of those, approximately 200 students had to be hospitalized due to headaches, fevers, vomiting, and diarrhea. The school was temporarily closed for an investigation. On the same day, middle school students in China's Liaoning Province also got food poisoning after eating dinner at school. The Ministry of Education ordered an investigation, and officials suspected that the cause of the food poisoning was unsanitary conditions at the schools. During summer vacation, the schools had not been cleaned or disinfected, and the pupils might have been exposed to unsanitary food or drinking water when they returned in September.
Contaminated turbot fish In late 2006, officials in Shanghai and Beijing discovered illegal amounts of chemicals in turbot. As The Epoch Times explained, "China started importing turbot from Europe in 1992. Currently, China's annual output is 40,000 tons. Since turbot have weak immune systems, some farmers use prohibited drugs to maintain their productivity, as their fish-farming technologies are not sufficient to prevent disease." Shanghai officials from the Shanghai Food and Drug Administration found carcinogenic nitrofuran metabolites in the fish and Beijing found additional drugs, including malachite green, in its fish. Other cities, including Hangzhou, have begun testing turbot fish and banning the turbot shipped from Shandong Province. Many restaurants in Shanghai, Beijing, and Hong Kong stopped purchasing turbot after officials discovered the high amounts of illegal antibiotics.
Pesticide residue on vegetables In early 2006, Greenpeace tested vegetables in two Hong Kong grocery stores, Parknshop and Wellcome, and discovered that over 70% of their samples were covered in pesticide residue. Thirty percent of their vegetable samples exceeded safe levels of pesticides and several tested positive for illegal pesticides, such as DDT, HCH and Lindane. Greenpeace explained that nearly 80% of vegetables in these grocery stores originated from mainland China. John Chapple, manager of Sinoanalytica, a Qingdao-based food analysis laboratory, supplemented Greenpeace's information. He was not surprised by the findings and explained that farmers in China have little knowledge of correct pesticide use. Although many Chinese farms are converting to organic agriculture, pesticide use in many areas remains high.
Infected snail meat In June, July, and August 2006, the Shuguo Yanyi Restaurant in Beijing served raw Amazonian snail meat and, as a result, 70 diners were diagnosed with angiostrongylus meningitis. The snail meat contained Angiostrongylus cantonesis, "a parasite that harms people's nervous system" causing headaches, vomiting, stiff necks, and fevers. No one died from the meningitis outbreak and the Beijing Municipal Office of Health inspection did not find any more raw snails in 2,000 other restaurants. However, the Beijing Municipal Office of Health prohibited restaurants from serving raw or half-cooked snails and disciplined the Shuguo Yanyi Restaurant. The Beijing Friendship Hospital, where the first meningitis case was treated, began a program to educate doctors on the treatment of angiostrongylus meningitis. The Guangzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention explained that these meningitis cases were the first outbreaks since the 1980s. 
Poisonous mushrooms In December 2006, sixteen diners were hospitalized after eating a poisonous variety of boletus mushrooms in Beijing at the Dayali Roast Duck Restaurant. The mushrooms caused nausea, vomiting, and dizziness and the ill diners were treated at the Bo'ai Hospital and the 307 Hospital of the People's Liberation Army. 
In November 2006, Chinese authorities at the Ministry of Health had warned of the rising number of mushroom poisonings. "From July to September, 31 people were killed and 183 were poisoned by toxic mushrooms." Officials worried that the public could not accurately separate edible mushrooms from poisonous ones.
Counterfeit drugs According to John Newton of Interpol, Chinese organized crime is involved in working across national boundaries and faking drugs on an industrial scale, now appearing throughout Africa. China Central Television cited an official saying those making the false albumin were making a 300% profit, assisted by shortages of the genuine product.
Alleged carcinogen used in frying oil In March 2007, the Guangzhou Information Times accused Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) of adding oil filtering powder, magnesium trisilicate, to its frying oil. It reported that KFC restaurants in several cities in the northwest Shaanxi Province used this chemical so that the frying oil could be used repeatedly for up to ten days. KFC pointed out that the additive is considered safe by United States and international standards, but health officials in Xianyang, Yulin, and Xi'an, all cities in the Shaanxi Province, inspected their local KFCs and confiscated the frying powder. Gaungzhou city officials also began in investigation into the frying oils, and the cities requested that the Ministry of Health step in. KFC stated that the oil filtering powder does not caused health problems and meets local and international standards, but local Chinese authorities claimed that reusing the powder decreased its nutritional value and that it was connected to cancer. Magnesium trisilicate is commonly used in medicines such as antacids, and is widely considered to be safe for human consumption with no known connections to cancer.
Contaminated wheat gluten and rice protein used for export In May 2007, The General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection, and Quarantine (AQSIQ) confirmed that two domestic companies had exported melamine-contaminated Wheat Gluten and rice protein blamed for the deaths of dogs and cats in the United States. In August 2007, AQSIQ introduced recall systems for unsafe food products and toys and on December 3, 2007, China ordered 69 categories of products to be bar-coded at factories amid efforts to improve product safety, in response to several recent incidents, including: "scares ranging from ducks and hens that were fed cancer-causing Sudan Red dye to make their egg yolks red, to pet food made of melamine-tainted wheat protein that killed scores of dogs and cats in the United States." See also 2007 pet food crisis.
Sewage used in tofu manufacturing Close to a hundred manufacturers of stinky tofu in Guangdong province were found to use a combination of sewage, slop, and Iron(II) sulfate to accelerate production and improve appearance of their fermented product.
Cardboard bun hoax 
Tainted Chinese dumplings In January 2008, several Japanese people in the Hyōgo and Chiba prefectures fell ill after consuming Chinese-produced jiaozi (pork dumplings) tainted with the insecticide methamidophos. The dumplings had been produced by the Tianyang Food Plant in Hebei Province and sold by JT Foods and the Japanese Consumers' Co-operative Union. Kyodo News reported that about 500 people complained of agonies. On February 5, 2008, Hyōgo and Chiba prefectural police announced that they were treating these cases as attempted murder. and both prefectural police departments established a joint investigation team.
When Japanese police and other prefectural authorities inspected the recalled dumplings, they found pesticides other than methamidophos, including Dichlorvos and Parathion. The Japanese National Police Agency found these toxins in packages that were completely sealed, concluding that it would have been nearly impossible to insert such toxins into the packages from the outside. They provided the test results to the Ministry of Public Security of China (MPS).
Investigations jointly held by both the Chinese and Japanese governments cleared the Chinese company of responsibility after finding no traces of any poison in the raw material used nor in the factory.
Officials are now treating this incident as a deliberate poisoning, and an investigation is underway.
On February 28, 2008 the MPS criminal investigation bureau announced that there was little chance that methamidophos had been put into the dumplings in China, and declared that the Japanese police had rejected the requirement by the MPS to check the scene, relative material evidences, and test reports, thus information on the evidence was not fully provided to the MPS. On the same day, Hiroto Yoshimura, the Comissionor-General of Japan's National Police Agency, argued against the Chinese authorities that the Japanese had already offered test results and photographic evidence and claimed that some part of China's assertion "cannot be overlooked". They asked Chinese authorities to offer evidence. 
On August 5, 2008, Japanese media revealed that some Chinese people who had eaten the recalled Chinese dumplings made by Tianyang Food had also become sick after the incident in Japan, in mid-June 2008; the cause was again found to have been methamidophos contamination. The Chinese government alerted the Japanese government to this fact just before the 34th G8 summit in July 2008. The Yomiuri Shimbun reported that this incident has increased the suspicion of foods produced in China.
Contaminated powdered ginger In July 2008, it was announced that the Whole Foods supermarket chain in the United States had been selling powdered ginger produced in China, which was labeled as organic food, but when tested was found to contain the banned pesticide Aldicarb. The ginger had been mistakenly certified organic by Quality Assurance International, who relied on two Chinese certifiers because, under Chinese law, foreigners may not inspect Chinese farms.
Contaminated baby formula In September 2008, a fresh outbreak of kidney disease occurred, due to baby formula contaminated by melamine. Six babies died and 294,000 were made sick by the tainted formula with 51,900 requiring hospitalization. The supplier of the milk, Sanlu Group, is a name brand and is a major player in the industry in China. The company is said to have known of the problem for months, but claims the contaminant came from milk suppliers.
Contaminated egg products In October 2008 news emerged certain egg products produced by Hanwei Group were also contaminated with melamine.
Plastic tapioca pearls Tapioca pearls used for bubble tea was adulterated with macromolecular polymers to improve their texture.
Pesticide in mantou To improve the chewiness and texture of the mantou (steamed buns) the pesticide Dichlorvos was added. In addition, sulphur was used to whiten the buns to improve their physical appearance.
Goat urine duck meat Businesses in Qingdao have been caught marinating duck meat in goat or sheep urine to give the duck with the smell and taste of lamb. The duck is then sold as lamb to customers.
Formaldehyde blood pudding Wuhan inspectors discovered that most of the pork blood pudding in Chinese markets contain little actual blood, but is manufactured with formaldehyde, corn starch, industrial grade salt, in addition to artificial food colouring.

Heavy Weather was a dramatisation for television by Douglas Livingstone of the novel Heavy Weather by P. G. Wodehouse (1881–1975), set at Blandings Castle. It was made by the BBC and WGBH Boston, first screened by the BBC on Christmas Eve 1995 and shown in the United States on PBS's Masterpiece Theatre on 18 February 1996.
Though abridged for a 90-minute film, Heavy Weather followed closely the novel of 1933, the fourth in the Blandings series. Many of the familiar elements of the Blandings books were present: the wish of Lord Emsworth's nephew, Ronnie Fish, to marry a chorus girl, Sue Brown ; the concern of Emsworth's sisters, the imperious Lady Constance Keeble and Ronnie's mother Lady Julia Fish, to ensure that the reminiscences of their other brother, the Hon. Galahad Threepwood, were not published; Galahad's protectiveness towards Miss Brown, the daughter of his long lost love Dolly Henderson ; the sustained efforts of the publisher Lord Tilbury (a character probably based on Lord Northcliffe ) to gain possession of the reminiscences; Lord Emsworth's determination that his prize Berkshire pig, the Empress of Blandings, should win the silver medal in the fat pigs class at the Shrewsbury agricultural show; Lord Emsworth's employment of a private detective, P. Frobisher Pilbeam, to protect the Empress and his rivalry with his neighbour, Sir Gregory Parsloe , of Matchingham Hall, who had not only his own designs on the fat pigs class, but, as a prospective Parliamentary candidate, an interest in suppressing Galahad's reminiscences; and the employment as Lord Emsworth's secretary of Monty Bodkin, who, as with most holders of that office, had an ulterior motive (in this instance, the need to hold down paid employment for a year in order to be considered suitable to marry one Gertrude Butterwick).
Heavy Weather had a distinguished cast: Peter O'Toole as Clarence, Lord Emsworth, Richard Briers as Galahad Threepwood, Judy Parfitt as Lady Constance, Sarah Badel as Lady Julia, Roy Hudd as Beach the butler, Ronald Fraser as Sir Gregory Parsloe and Richard Johnson as Lord Tilbury, the recently ennobled George "Stinker" Pyke. Pilbeam was played by David Bamber who became widely known around the same time as Mr. Collins in the BBC's adaptation of Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice. Other members of the cast included Rebecca Lacey as Sue Brown, Benjamin Soames as Ronnie Fish and Samuel West as Monty Bodkin.
The screenplay was written by Douglas Livingstone (born 1930). The director was Jack Gold and the producers, Verity Lambert and David Shanks.
There were many devotees of Wodehouse who assumed at the time that Heavy Weather was, in effect, a “pilot” for a series of Blandings adaptations. As such, this would have complemented the four series of Jeeves and Wooster (Granada, 1990-3), stories derived from Wodehouse that featured rising stars Stephen Fry as Jeeves and Hugh Laurie as Bertie Wooster. However, not only did no series follow, but Heavy Weather has never been repeated on British television. It was however released on video (VHS) by Acorn Media in 1999. A DVD release is yet to appear.
This alone tended to set it apart from the array of successful dramas, set in the second and early third quarters of the 20th century, that had were shown on British television in the 1980s and early 90s. In addition to Jeeves and Wooster, these included definitive adaptations from 1984 onwards of Agatha Christie’s Miss Marple and Poirot stories (with Joan Hickson and David Suchet in the leading roles) ; other detective stories, such as Christie's The Seven Dials Mystery (LWT, 1980), featuring Cheryl Campbell as a neo-Wodehousian "flapper", Lady Bundle Brent, and Margery Allingham’s about Albert Campion (BBC 1989-90); The House of Elliot (BBC 1991-4), with Louise Lombard and Stella Gonet as struggling couturiers in the 1920s; and two series (LWT 1985-6), based on E. F. Benson’s Mapp and Lucia novels, that, although described by one leading critic as "nicely realised, if appealing more to the fans of the six novels ... than to the audience in general" , were nevertheless repeated several times over the following twenty years and released in both VHS and DVD formats.
In fact, as film historian Leslie Halliwell noted, Wodehouse’s "sagas of upper class twits and manservants in the twenties have been oddly neglected by the screen, though they were much imitated" . However, there were two films made in the 1930s with Arthur Treacher as Jeeves (Thank You, Jeeves! in 1936, which also featured David Niven as Wooster, and Step Lively, Jeeves! in 1937) and, in 1937, A Damsel in Distress (1919), virtually a Blandings novel, but with different characters, was turned by RKO into a musical film, scored by George Gershwin, that starred Fred Astaire and Joan Fontaine.
An adaptation by C E Webber of a Wodehouse short story of 1935 was broadcast on BBC children's television in March 1956 as Lord Emsworth and the Little Friend. Then, in the 1960s, the BBC made a popular series called The World of Wooster (1965-7), featuring Dennis Price as Jeeves and Ian Carmichael as a rather middle-aged Bertie Wooster (Wodehouse himself much preferred Price’s performance ). This led to, among other spin-offs, a series of Blandings Castle (1967) with Sir Ralph Richardson as Lord Emsworth, Meriel Forbes as Lady Constance, Stanley Holloway as Beach, Derek Nimmo as Galahad Threepwood, and, as one Wodehouse scholar acutely observed, a Wessex Saddleback, rather than a Berkshire, as the Empress of Blandings .
Between 1984-92 there were several BBC radio adaptations of Blandings, in which Richard Vernon, as Lord Emsworth, conveyed a mix of eccentricity and amiability (his delivery being quite similar to that in his occasional role in Yes Minister and Yes, Prime Minister (BBC TV 1980-8) as the befuddled City banker Sir Desmond Glazebrook). Ian Carmichael played Galahad in a number of these productions. In 1992 Random House Audiobooks released an abridged version of Heavy Weather, read by Martin Jarvis.
In 1995 Heavy Weather became the only visual feature-length version of Blandings since the Second World War, closer to the original novel than most other adaptations of Wodehouse. Some may have found Peter O’Toole’s Emsworth a little too eccentric and irascible, while the touches of "realism", such as quantities of pig-swill, which tended not to intrude into earlier Wodehouse productions, conceivably detracted from the cosy air of fantasy. But, even so, the lack of any follow-up to such a major enterprise seemed puzzling to many.
Like the adaptations of Benson's Mapp and Lucia, Heavy Weather probably appealed more to fans of Wodehouse than to a wider audience (a serious consideration for a programme broadcast at peak viewing time on Christmas Eve). It is possible too that, by the mid 1990s, the public's appetite for dramas of the 1920s and 30s, was beginning to wane. A genre that was coming strongly back into vogue at the time was the large scale adaptation of the classic novel. This was typified by the BBC's Pride and Prejudice (with Colin Firth as Darcy and Jennifer Ehle as Elizabeth Bennet, Ehle having come to public attention as the vampish Calypso in The Camomile Lawn, Channel 4's dramatisation (1992) of Mary Wesley's novel (1984), which opened on the eve of war in 1939), but there were also feature films of other Jane Austen novels, such as Sense and Sensibility (with Emma Thompson, Kate Winslet and Hugh Grant, 1995) and Emma (a film with Gwyneth Paltrow in the title role and a TV version with Kate Beckinsale, both 1996 ). A further landmark was the film, Four Weddings and a Funeral (1994), starring Hugh Grant. This was a highly successful light comedy in the tradition of the Ealing films of the late 1940s and early 50s, but clearly rooted in the present day (and with some of its vernacular language), rather than looking to the past.
The mid 1990s were a period of transition in British popular culture and arguably in the country more generally. Although, in 1993, the Prime Minister John Major had made a widely quoted, almost Betjeman-eque, assertion that "fifty years on from now, Britain will still be the country of long shadows on county cricket grounds, warm beer ... and, as George Orwell said, old maids bicycling to Holy Communion" , this seemed to some a rather sentimental and complacent view. By 1995 "Britpop" was at its height, in certain respects mirroring the impact of the Beatles thirty years earlier and about to be caught up, or subsumed, in the concept of "Cool Britannia". 1996-7 would see the rise of so-called "girl power" (notably, for a time, in the pervasive guise of the Spice Girls), the sweeping election victory (in May 1997) of Tony Blair and his "New" Labour Party and, a few months later, the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, the mawkish public reaction to which was thought by many at the time to have changed Britain for ever.
Although, as Evelyn Waugh once said, "Mr Wodehouse's idyllic word can never stale ... He has made a world for us to live in and delight in" , the circumstances of Britain towards at the end of the 20th century probably did not bode well for a sustained revival of Blandings. For example, in the next few years, the continuing adaptations of Poirot became a little "darker" in tone and dispensed with many of the lighter elements of the earlier episodes (such as Poirot’s associate Captain Hastings, who had many Wodehousian characteristics and, like Conan Doyle's Dr Watson, was "unable to keep his cognition uncontaminated by his all-too-human emotions and motives" ). In 2001 the film Gosford Park, a murder mystery, set in 1932, which harked back to the "deep focus" of Jean Renoir's 1939 film La règle du jeu, firmly established a trend away from the nostalgic, lavish period recreations - of which Heavy Weather was one of the last - that had been prevalent since the late 1970s.
Even so, a sign of Wodehouse's sustained influence was the establishment, as the Internet began to take hold in the mid 1990s, of a search engine called "Ask Jeeves". This title survived until shortened to "Ask" in 2006. The following year, when it was reported that the British Prime Minister wished to employ a butler (in fact, a "house manager" ), the Mail on Sunday referred to "Mr Blair's very own 21st Century Jeeves" .
Heavy Weather was filmed at Sudeley Castle, Gloucestershire, which was widely, though not universally, regarded as Wodehouse's model for Blandings . Wodehouse set Blandings in the more northerly county of Shropshire, a location that stimulated some intriguing research by Richard Usborne, a leading Wodehouse scholar, into train journeys (of which there were two in Heavy Weather) between London's Paddington station and Market Blandings .
Sudeley was the home, during her marriage to Thomas Seymour, of Queen Katherine Parr, sixth wife of King Henry VIII. Katherine died in 1548 and is buried in the chapel at Sudeley. The castle has been owned since 1837 by the Dent Brocklehurst family . In 1972 it passed, on the death of his father, to Henry Dent Brocklehurst (born 1966), whose mother, later Lady Ashcombe, initially held Sudeley in trust and, by the mid 1990s, had done much to develop its potential for tourism and business .
The location of Heavy Weather at Sudeley assisted public awareness of the castle and its grounds. Sudeley's promotional literature emphasised the Wodehouse connection, noting, for example, that the double yew hedges in the Queen's Garden were the inspiration for the gardens of Blandings .
Henry Augustus Peirce (1808-1885) was an American businessman and diplomat. Some sources spell his last name as Pierce.
He was born in Dorchester Massachusetts (now part of Boston) December 15, 1808. His father was Joseph Hardy Peirce (1773–1832) son of Joseph Peirce (1748–1812) and his mother was Frances Temple. He had at least one brother and five sisters. He attended public schools in Boston, and then about 1822 worked for his father and uncle as a court clerk. On October 24, 1824 he enrolled on the crew of the merchant ship Griffon mastered by his brother Marus T. Peirce. On March 25, 1825 the Griffon landed in Honolulu for provisions. He was promoted to ship's clerk for the three year trading voyage on the west coast of British Columbia. In September 1828 the Griffon was back in Honolulu, and Peirce stayed while his brother returned.
Peirce worked as a clerk for fellow ex-New Englander James Hunnewell (1794–1869), who ran a mercantile business. He eventually became a partner, and then owner when Hunnewell left in 1830. In 1834 he chartered the Becket from King Kamehameha III and traveled to China trading sandalwood and merchandise to the Kamchatka Peninsula. In 1835 he formed a partnership with one of the commanders of his ships, Captain Charles Brewer (1804–1885), and continued to develop the shipping business.
Some time around 1828 he took a common-law wife (before marriages were legally required to be recorded) named Kahoa, or Virginia Rives, whose mother was a Hawaiian noble and father was Jean-Baptiste Rives, the French former Secretary of Kamehameha II. They had a son named Henry E. Pierce in 1830 (changing the spelling the last name), whom he took to the mainland for his education. Kahoa divorced in 1837, and Henry E. and his mother moved to Kamchatka.
In 1836 after sailing on one of his ships to China, he traveled to New York. It was his first time back in his native country for 12 years. On January 19, 1837 he sailed again out of Boston to Brazil. He then went around Cape Horn to Peru, where he was employed as Peruvian Consul to Hawaii. In November 1837 he sold a ship in Valparaiso, Chile and traveled overland back to Brazil. From there he sailed back to New York and Boston. He married Susan R. Thompson on July 3, 1838. Less than a year later he purchased the schooner Morse and left again on April 21, 1839. Via Cape Horn again, he arrived in Honolulu October, 1839. In November 1841 he sailed for Alta California. Although there were plans for American settlement, it was still a spare Spanish outpost. In a letter to Thomas Cummins in February 1841 he wrote: 
He sailed south down the California coast, continuing to trade as he went. After reaching San Blas, Mexico he traveled by land to Mexico City and the eastern coast, then boat to Cuba. From there he traveled north to Washington, D.C. where he met with Daniel Webster who was then Secretary of State. Finally he saw his family again for the first time in three years.
In 1843 Peirce retired from the Honolulu business, which became C. Brewer & Co. After some other owners, the name would be changed back by Brewer's nephew, the name it would keep through the 21st century. It became one of the Big Five companies that dominated the economy of the Territory of Hawaii.
In 1844 Peirce took a tour of Europe, but continued to invest in shipping ventures. One of his ships was chartered in 1847 to send provisions to Monterey, California for the U.S. forces there. At the start of the California Gold Rush, he sailed on the ship Montreal on January 19, 1849. When they arrived in San Francisco in July 1849, the entire crew left to join the gold rush. By September he had gathered another crew and sent the Montreal back to New England, while he went to Honolulu. He invested in a small sugar plantation on Kauai island with Charles Reed Bishop and William Little Lee, but it failed while he headed off to China. There he joined a venture sending Chinese goods to San Francisco at a great profit. Finally in April 1850 he returned to Boston after circumnavigating the earth. Seeing the new market potential, he joined his old friends Hunnewell and Brewer in a partnership sending goods between Hawaii and California. This time he stayed behind with his wife and two children, acting as Consul for Hawaii in New England.
The outbreak of the American Civil War and financial scandals caused great losses in the 1860s. He helped provide transportation for troops, and was meeting at Port Royal, South Carolina with Admiral William Reynolds whom he had known in Hawaii in 1840, when he heard Abraham Lincoln had been assassinated. He attended the funeral procession on his way home. In 1866 he invested in a venture to use freed slaves for a cotton plantation in Yazoo County, Mississippi, but that venture also failed. He had to sell his Beacon Street mansion to settle his debts.
On May 10, 1869 Peirce was appointed U.S. Minister to Hawaiian Islands, and confirmed by the U.S. Senate on December 21, 1869. This time he traveled on the transcontinental railroad and arrived in Honolulu by June 15, 1869, twenty years after his last visit. On July 19, 1869 he presented his credentials at the court of King Kamehameha V. When this last ruler of the House of Kamehameha died on December 11, 1872 without naming a successor, the Kingdom faced a political crisis. The popular King Lunalilo then died on February 3, 1874, again with no successor, and the crisis deepened when King Kalākaua was elected by the legislature. Supporters of Queen Emma of Hawaii who was popular with the people, started to protest. At the request of C. R. Bishop who was Minister of the Interior, Peirce called out American troops from the frigates and .
On November 17, 1874 Kalākaua left accompanied by Peirce and some other government ministers on a visit to Washington D.C. which was the first state visit of a ruling monarch to the United States. They were guests at a state dinner and reception with President Ulysses S. Grant and the U.S. Cabinet. The Reciprocity Treaty of 1875 allowed use of Pearl Harbor by the U.S. in exchange for elimination of tariffs on Hawaiian goods. This was a careful compromise between those who wanted full annexation of the islands or cessation of the Harbor, and others who opposed any threats to sovereignty. Peirce had worked for years on arranging the trip and treaty, interrupted by the deaths of the two previous monarchs. Kalākaua offered Peirce the Royal Order of Kamehameha, but he had to wait until no longer employed by the U.S. Government to accept.
He served until being replaced by James M. Comly on September 25, 1877. On November 17, 1877 he arrived in San Francisco, but the cold weather convinced him to return to Hawaii January 8, 1878. As he was about to leave, Kalākaua offered him the post of Minister of Foreign Affairs for the Kingdom of Hawaii on March 1. There was a shortage of experienced politicians and diplomats willing to serve; in fact, the Minister from the Kingdom to the United States was fellow New Englander Elisha Hunt Allen. Americans were negotiating on both sides of the 1875 treaty. Allen also was chief justice of the Hawaii Supreme Court.
However, after a no confidence vote was narrowly defeated by the legislature, Kalākaua replaced his entire cabinet on July 3, 1878. Peirce served for one session in the House of Nobles, and was sent to an exhibition in Boston in 1883. He returned to Boston one more time and then resided in San Francisco where he died on July 29, 1885.

The Holtzman effect is a fictional scientific phenomenon in the ''Dune'' universe created by Frank Herbert, beginning with the 1965 novel Dune. The effect is never explained in detail, but it makes (among other things) defensive force shields and instantaneous space travel possible.
Frank Herbert was inconsistent with the spelling of "Holtzman," resulting in the variant spellings "Holtzmann" (1976's Children of Dune) and "Holzmann" (1985's Chapterhouse: Dune). This is likely intentional, as Herbert mutated other words and names over the several millennia the Dune series spans, such as the change of "Arrakis" to "Rakis" and "Caladan" to "Dan" beginning with Heretics of Dune (1984).
According to the Legends of Dune prequel trilogy by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson (2002–2004), the Holtzman effect is named after the scientist who discovered it, Tio Holtzman (though for many of its applications, Holtzman in fact takes credit for the mathematical theories of his assistant, Norma Cenva).
In Terminology of the Imperium, the glossary of the novel Dune, Frank Herbert provides the following definition:
In Dune, the technology has been adapted for reliable use in personal defensive shields. These shields, unlike many others in science fiction, are not round projections of force, but form-fitting energy fields which permit penetration only by objects that move below a pre-set velocity. Paul Atreides notes in Dune, "In shield fighting, one moves fast on defense, slow on attack ... Attack has the sole purpose of tricking the opponent into a misstep, setting him up for the attack sinister. The shield turns the fast blow, admits the slow kindjal!"
As one would be unable to breathe within a shield that did not permit atmospheric gases to penetrate it, man-portable shields have a relatively high penetration velocity, approximately six to nine centimeters per second.
The interaction of a lasgun beam and a Holtzman field results in subatomic fusion and a nuclear explosion. The magnitude of this blast is unpredictable; sometimes it destroys only the shielded target and gunner, sometimes the explosion is more powerful than atomics. Using lasguns in a shielded environment can result in military and environmental catastrophe, though at one point in Dune Duncan Idaho deliberately allows shield-lasgun contact as a discouragement to his enemies. In God Emperor of Dune (1981), The God Emperor Leto II notes 3,500 years into his reign that "Shields are banned throughout the Empire" and it is a capital offense to possess one to avoid such explosive interactions.
The vibrations of an active shield will drive a sandworm on Arrakis into a killing frenzy, drawing them from across territorial lines to attack the shield. For this reason, the native Fremen eschew them. It is noted in Children of Dune that the Fremen have developed a small shield generator known as a "pseudo-shield" to attract and madden a worm, for use as an ersatz bomb.
The effect is used in this case to fold space at the quantum level, allowing the Spacing Guild's heighliner ships to instantaneously travel far distances across space. However, the chaotic and seemingly non-deterministic quantum nature of "foldspace" requires at least limited prescience on the part of the human navigator; otherwise the absurdly complex mathematics involved in producing reliable physical projections of such events would only be possible with advanced thinking machines, which are strictly prohibited because of mankind's crusade against thinking machines, the Butlerian Jihad. To this effect, the Guild produces melange-saturated Navigators who intuitively "see paths through foldspace" in this way. This stumbling block is overcome several thousand years after the events of Dune when Ixian scientists develop mechanical replacements for Guild Navigators.
Hovering devices called suspensors utilize the secondary (low-drain) phase of a Holtzman field generator to nullify gravity within certain limits prescribed by relative mass and energy consumption. Suspensors are used in chairs, tables, and structures that are too massive to be physically sound, among many other obvious uses. In Dune, the grotesquely obese Baron Vladimir Harkonnen utilizes suspensor belts and harnesses to buoy his flesh and allow him to walk. In Dune, Jessica theorizes that suspensors, like shields, attract sandworms, and while some are seen in Fremen sietch communities, none are active in the deep desert.
A varied use of the Holtzman effect is the glowglobe. This device is a small glowing sphere that floats gracefully above a surface like a portable, personal sun, since it is typically tuned to a yellowish color. Herbert's description in the glossary of Dune reads:
The non-canon Dune Encyclopedia (1984) by Dr. Willis E. McNelly invents an extensive, alternate origin and description of the Holtzman effect. In this version, it is discovered by Ibrahim Vaughn Holtzman (born 7593 B.G.):
The son of the planetary governor of Liesco II, Holtzman has a specialized ship constructed and "escapes" into space to "think." His mathematical genius is enhanced by the exponentially-increased mental processing made possible by his new computerized form (which also allows him to exist for nearly 7500 years). He focuses on analyzing the suspensor-nullification effect, which (as Frank Herbert established) makes interstellar travel possible. According to the Encyclopedia, this effect had been discovered 5400 years earlier but is not fully understood. Holtzman's first related discovery is an "instantaneous interstellar communication device" later called the Holtzman Wave.
Until this point, interstellar travel had effected a widespread population of the universe which could no longer be controlled by the Imperial House Ceres. The development of Holtzman Wave generators gives mankind the means to easily communicate across vast distances and results in the long and "ferocious" Wars of Reunification. Holtzman himself remains in seclusion, returning to civilization five times. On his third return, over 2000 years after his original escape, he gives humanity his next related discovery: defensive shields. On his fourth return millennia later, "Holtzman 'published' his unified theory, linking the various effects into a single hierarchy of phenomena." The last intelligent machine left in existence after the Butlerian Jihad, he is apparently destroyed in 108 B.G. Knowing his ship is booby trapped with a dormant laser aimed at a defensive shield, the Jihad fleet send a volunteer to board the ship, thereby setting off the explosion which results from shield-laser interaction.
According to the Encyclopedia, the three-dimensional suspensor-nullification effect is discovered thousands of years before Holtzman explored the associated phenomena; his name is eventually applied to all manifestations of the Holtzman effect.
The Brian Herbert/Kevin J. Anderson Legends of Dune prequel trilogy (2002–2004) establishes that the Holtzman effect is discovered by and named after scientist and inventor Tio Holtzman immediately prior to the Butlerian Jihad, some 10,000 years before the events of Dune. The technology is employed for defensive force fields capable of scrambling the gel-circuitry of thinking machines, the force of sentient computers and robots who seek to enslave and exterminate mankind. Networks of towers generating the field from the surface protect entire planets from machine attacks.
Residing on the planet Poritrin, Holtzman's career is on the wane, as he has not invented anything significant in several years. He comes across the work of Norma Cenva, a woman from Rossak; realizing her genius, he invites her to come work with him on Poritrin. The machines soon realize that their cymeks (human-machine hybrids) can slip though the planetary force fields to destroy the transmitters because they possess human brains, which are unaffected by the scrambler fields. Cenva has the idea to use the field as an offensive weapon, projecting it with portable transmitters to knock out machines and their installations. Holtzman later calculates that the field can be modified to prevent penetration from physical projectiles; Cenva agrees, correcting the flaws in his concept but noting that objects can still pass through the shield at a slow enough speed. The human forces start installing these new shields on their battleships and most ground forces. However, as it is still a new technology at the time, the shields tend to overheat with too much use and deactivate. As time passes, Holtzman discovers that the young dwarfish woman is much more creative than he, and after being upstaged by her twice, begins to dislike her. Eventually he takes credit for Cenva's mathematical theories, which lead to many practical uses for Holtzman's original discovery, including the Holtzman Drive, Holtzman Shields, suspensors and glowglobes. Cenva is also credited with the realization that hitting a Holtzman field with a lasgun beam results in a large and unpredictable explosion. Her theory is proven in the 2003 novel Dune: The Machine Crusade, when Holtzman himself is killed by the explosion from such an interaction during a slave uprising on Poritrin.
The Legends of Dune series also establishes that Cenva invents the theory of space folding in 177 B.G. during the Butlerian Jihad after years of working on Holtzman's original field equations. By 174 B.G. she had built a prototype space-folding ship, and soon she and industrialist Aurelius Venport establish a shipyard on the planet Kolhar to produce what would eventually be called heighliners. Within a decade, Venport puts the space-folding technology and shipyards at the disposal of the Jihad forces. Initially, foldspace travel is not completely accurate or safe; only about nine out of every ten heighliners make it to their final destination. Realizing that the spice melange amplifies her psychic and calculative abilities, Norma pioneers the use of massive concentrated doses to presciently perceive space/time. In 88 B.G. she discovers that this is the way to safely navigate foldspace, and essentially becomes the first Navigator. That same year, Norma's son Adrien Venport founds the Foldspace Shipping Company, which later becomes the Spacing Guild and eventually monopolizes space commerce, transport and interplanetary banking. Cenva's name is eventually forgotten by history, but she is more interested in improving defensive shields and developing foldspace travel to make it safer and more efficient. Her efforts help humanity defeat the thinking machines.
In 1999's Dune: House Atreides (the first novel of the Prelude to Dune prequel trilogy by Brian Herbert and Anderson), the following is stated via epigraph:

Hunter Stockton Thompson (July 18, 1937 – February 20, 2005) was an American journalist and author, most famous for his roman a clef Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. He is credited as the creator of Gonzo journalism, a style of reporting where reporters involve themselves in the action to such a degree that they become central figures of their stories. He was also known for his use of psychedelics, alcohol, firearms, and his iconoclastic contempt for authoritarianism.
Hunter Stockton Thompson was born in Louisville, Kentucky, the first of three sons to Jack Robert Thompson (1893 - July 3, 1952), an insurance adjuster and a World War I veteran, and Virginia Davidson (née Ray; 1908–1998), a reference librarian. His parents met after being introduced by a mutual friend from Jack's fraternity in 1934, and married in 1935.
The Thompson family resided in the Cherokee Triangle neighborhood of the Highlands in Louisville. Jack Thompson died of myasthenia gravis, a neuromuscular disease, on July 3, 1952, when Hunter was 14 years old, leaving three sons—Hunter, Davison, and James (February 2, 1949 – March 25, 1993)—to be brought up by their mother. Contemporaries indicated that after Jack's death, Virginia became a "heavy drinker".
Interested in sports and athletically inclined from a young age, Thompson joined Louisville's Castlewood Athletic Club, a sports club for teenagers that prepared them for high-school sports, where he excelled in baseball, though he never joined any sports teams in high school, where he was constantly in trouble.
Thompson attended the I.N. Bloom Elementary School, and then Highland Middle School, then Atherton High School, transferring to Louisville Male High School in 1952 following the death of his father. That same year he was accepted as a member of the Athenaeum Literary Association, a school-sponsored literary and social club that had been founded at Male High in 1862. Its members at the time, generally drawn from Louisville's wealthy upper-class families, included Porter Bibb, who became the first publisher of Rolling Stone.
As an Athenaeum member, Thompson contributed articles and helped edit the club's yearbook The Spectator; however, the group ejected Thompson from its membership in 1955, citing his legal problems. Charged as an accessory to robbery after having been in a car with the person who committed the robbery, Thompson was sentenced to serve 60 days in Kentucky's Jefferson County Jail. He served 30 days of his sentence, and joined the U.S. Air Force a week after his release.
Thompson did his basic training at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas, and later transferred to Scott Air Force Base in Illinois to study electronics. He applied to become a pilot but was rejected by the Air Force's aviation-cadet program. In 1956, he transferred to Eglin Air Force Base, near Pensacola, Florida. There he worked in the information-services department and became the sports editor of the base's newspaper, The Command Courier. In this capacity, he covered the Eglin Eagles, a base football team that included such future professional stars as Max McGee and Zeke Bratkowski. Thompson traveled with the team around the U.S., covering its games. In 1957, he also wrote a sports column anonymously for The Playground News, a local newspaper in Fort Walton Beach, Florida.
Thompson left the Air Force in 1958 as an Airman First Class, having been recommended for an early honorable discharge by his commanding officer. "In summary, this airman, although talented, will not be guided by policy", Col. William S. Evans, chief of information services wrote to the Eglin personnel office. "Sometimes his rebel and superior attitude seems to rub off on other airmen staff members." Thompson claimed in a mock press release he wrote about the end of his duty to have been issued a "totally unclassifiable" status.
After the Air Force, he worked as sports editor for a newspaper in Jersey Shore, Pennsylvania before moving to New York City. There he attended Columbia University's School of General Studies part-time on the G.I. Bill, taking classes in short-story writing.
Thompson's friends and letters from this period note he was an avid reader of the Beat Generation during his early years as a writer and that he associated himself with the Beat culture while living in New York City. He would later befriend such Beat authors as Allen Ginsberg and William S. Burroughs.
During this time he worked briefly for Time, as a copy boy for $51 a week. While working, he used a typewriter to copy F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby and Ernest Hemingway's A Farewell to Arms in order to learn about the writing styles of the authors. In 1959, Time fired him for insubordination. Later that year, he worked as a reporter for The Middletown Daily Record in Middletown, New York. He was fired from this job after damaging an office candy machine and arguing with the owner of a local restaurant who happened to be an advertiser with the paper.
In 1960 Thompson moved to San Juan, Puerto Rico, to take a job with the sporting magazine El Sportivo, which soon folded after his arrival. Thompson had first applied for a job with the Puerto Rico English-language daily The San Juan Star, but its managing editor, future novelist William J. Kennedy, declined Thompson's request. Nonetheless, the two became friends and after the demise of El Sportivo, Thompson worked as a stringer for the New York Herald Tribune and a few stateside papers on Caribbean issues with Kennedy working as his editor. After returning to the States, Hunter lived in California, working as a security guard and caretaker at the Big Sur Hot springs for an eight-month period in 1961, just before it became the Esalen Institute. While there, he was able to publish his first magazine feature in the nationally distributed Rogue magazine on the artisan and bohemian culture of Big Sur. The unwanted publicity generated from the article got him fired from his job as a caretaker.
During this period, Thompson wrote two novels, Prince Jellyfish and The Rum Diary, and submitted many short stories to publishers with little success. The Rum Diary, which fictionalized Thompson's experiences in Puerto Rico, was eventually published in 1998, long after Thompson had become famous.
From May 1962 to May 1963, Thompson traveled to South America as a correspondent for a Dow Jones-owned weekly newspaper, the National Observer. In Brazil, he spent several months working also as a reporter on the Brazil Herald, the country's only English-language daily, published in Rio de Janeiro. His longtime girlfriend Sandra Dawn Conklin (aka Sandy Conklin Thompson, now Sondi Wright) later joined him in Rio.
Thompson and Conklin were married on May 19, 1963, shortly after they returned to the United States. They briefly relocated to Aspen, Colorado, and had one son, Juan Fitzgerald Thompson, born March 23, 1964. The couple conceived five more times together. Three of the pregnancies were miscarried, and the other two pregnancies produced infants who died shortly after birth. Hunter and Sandy divorced in 1980 but remained close friends until Thompson's death.
In 1964 the Thompson family then moved to Glen Ellen, California, where Thompson continued to write for the National Observer on an array of domestic subjects, including a story about his 1964 visit to Ketchum, Idaho, in order to investigate the reasons for Ernest Hemingway's suicide. While working on the story, Thompson symbolically stole a pair of elk antlers hanging above the front door of Hemingway's cabin. Thompson and the editors at the Observer eventually had a falling out after the paper refused to print Thompson's review of Tom Wolfe's 1965 essay collection The Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamline Baby, and he moved to San Francisco, immersing himself in the drug and hippie culture that was taking root in the area. About this time he began writing for the Berkeley underground paper The Spyder.
In 1965, Carey McWilliams, editor of The Nation, offered Thompson the opportunity to write a story based on his experience with the California-based Hells Angels motorcycle gang. After The Nation published the article (May 17, 1965), Thompson received several book offers and spent the next year living and riding with the Hell's Angels. The relationship broke down when the bikers suspected that Thompson was only friends with them so he could make money from his writing. The gang demanded a share of the profits and after an argument at a party Thompson ended up with a savage beating, or "stomping" as the Angels referred to it. Random House published the hard cover Hell's Angels: The Strange and Terrible Saga of the Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs in 1966. A reviewer for The New York Times praised it as an "angry, knowledgeable, fascinating and excitedly written book", that shows the Hells Angels "not so much as dropouts from society but as total misfits, or unfits — emotionally, intellectually and educationally unfit to achieve the rewards, such as they are, that the contemporary social order offers." The reviewer also praised Thompson as a "spirited, witty, observant and original writer; his prose crackles like motorcycle exhaust."
Following the success of Hells Angels, Thompson was able to publish articles in a number of well-known magazines during the late 1960s, including The New York Times Magazine, Esquire, Pageant, and others. In the Times Magazine article, published in 1967, shortly before the "Summer of Love", and entitled "The Hashbury is the Capital of the Hippies", Thompson wrote in-depth about the Hippies of San Francisco, deriding a culture that began to lack the political convictions of the New Left and the artistic core of the Beats, instead becoming overrun with newcomers lacking any purpose other than obtaining drugs. It was an observation on the 60s' counterculture that Thompson would further examine in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas and other articles.
According to Thompson's letters and his later writings, at this time he planned to write a book called The Joint Chiefs about "the death of the American Dream." He used a $6,000 advance from Random House to travel on the 1968 Presidential campaign trail and attend the 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago for research purposes. From his hotel room in Chicago, Thompson watched the clashes between police and protesters, which he wrote had a great effect on his political views. The planned book was never finished, but the theme of the death of the American dream would be carried over into his later work, and the contract with Random House was eventually fulfilled with the 1972 book Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas.
Thompson also signed a deal with Ballantine Books in 1968 to write a satirical book called The Johnson about Lyndon B. Johnson. A few weeks after the contract was signed, however, Johnson announced that he would not stand for re-election, and the deal was canceled.
By late 1967, Thompson and his family moved back to Colorado and rented a house in Woody Creek, a small mountain hamlet outside Aspen. In early 1969, Thompson finally received a $15,000 royalty check for the paperback sales of Hells Angels and used two-thirds of the money for a down payment on a modest home and property where he would live for the rest of his life. He named the house Owl Farm and often described it as his "fortified compound."
In 1970 Thompson ran for sheriff of Pitkin County, Colorado, as part of a group of citizens running for local offices on the "Freak Power" ticket. The platform included promoting the decriminalization of drugs (for personal use only, not trafficking, as he disapproved of profiteering), tearing up the streets and turning them into grassy pedestrian malls, banning any building so tall as to obscure the view of the mountains, and renaming Aspen "Fat City" to deter investors. Thompson, having shaved his head, referred to his opponent as "my long-haired opponent", as the Republican candidate had a crew cut.
With polls showing him with a slight lead in a three-way race, Thompson appeared at Rolling Stone magazine headquarters in San Francisco with a six-pack of beer in hand and declared to editor Jann Wenner that he was about to be elected the next sheriff of Aspen, Colorado, and wished to write about the Freak Power movement. Thus, Thompson's first article in Rolling Stone was published as The Battle of Aspen with the byline "By: Dr. Hunter S. Thompson (Candidate for Sheriff)." Despite the publicity, Thompson ended up narrowly losing the election. While actually carrying the city of Aspen, he garnered only 44% of the county-wide vote in what became a two-way race as the Republican candidate for sheriff agreed to withdraw from the contest a few days before the election in order to consolidate the anti-Thompson votes, in return for the Democrats withdrawing their candidate for county commissioner. Thompson later remarked that the Rolling Stone article mobilized his opposition far more than his supporters.
Also in 1970, Thompson wrote an article entitled The Kentucky Derby Is Decadent and Depraved for the short-lived new journalism magazine Scanlan's Monthly. Although it was not widely read at the time, the article is the first of Thompson's to use techniques of Gonzo journalism, a style he would later employ in almost every literary endeavor. The manic first-person subjectivity of the story was reportedly the result of sheer desperation; he was facing a looming deadline and started sending the magazine pages ripped out of his notebook. Ralph Steadman, who would later collaborate with Thompson on several projects, contributed expressionist pen-and-ink illustrations.
The first use of the word Gonzo to describe Thompson's work is credited to the journalist Bill Cardoso. Cardoso had first met Thompson on a bus full of journalists covering the 1968 New Hampshire primary. In 1970, Cardoso (who, by this time had become the editor of The Boston Globe Sunday Magazine) wrote to Thompson praising the "Kentucky Derby" piece in Scanlan's Monthly as a breakthrough: "This is it, this is pure Gonzo. If this is a start, keep rolling." Thompson took to the word right away, and according to illustrator Ralph Steadman said, "Okay, that's what I do. Gonzo."
Thompson's first published use of the word Gonzo appears in a passage in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas: A Savage Journey to the Heart of the American Dream: "Free Enterprise. The American Dream. Horatio Alger gone mad on drugs in Las Vegas. Do it now: pure Gonzo journalism."
The book for which Thompson gained most of his fame had its genesis during the research for Strange Rumblings in Aztlan, an exposé for Rolling Stone on the 1970 killing of the Mexican-American television journalist Rubén Salazar. Salazar had been shot in the head at close range with a tear gas canister fired by officers of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department during the National Chicano Moratorium March against the Vietnam War. One of Thompson's sources for the story was Oscar Zeta Acosta, a prominent Mexican-American activist and attorney. Finding it difficult to talk in the racially tense atmosphere of Los Angeles, Thompson and Acosta decided to travel to Las Vegas, Nevada, and take advantage of an assignment by Sports Illustrated to write a 250-word photograph caption on the Mint 400 motorcycle race held there.
What was to be a short caption quickly grew into something else entirely. Thompson first submitted to Sports Illustrated a manuscript of 2,500 words, which was, as he later wrote, "aggressively rejected." Rolling Stone publisher Jann Wenner was said to have liked "the first 20 or so jangled pages enough to take it seriously on its own terms and tentatively scheduled it for publication — which gave me the push I needed to keep working on it", Thompson later wrote.
The result of the trip to Las Vegas became the 1972 book Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas which first appeared in the November 1971 issues of Rolling Stone as a two-part series. It is written as a first-person account by a journalist named Raoul Duke on a trip to Las Vegas with Dr. Gonzo, his "300-pound Samoan attorney", to cover a narcotics officers' convention and the "fabulous Mint 400". During the trip, Duke and his companion (always referred to as "my attorney") become sidetracked by a search for the American Dream, with "...two bags of grass, seventy-five pellets of mescaline, five sheets of high-powered blotter acid, a salt shaker half full of cocaine, and a whole galaxy of multi-colored uppers, downers, screamers, laughers ... and also a quart of tequila, a quart of rum, a case of Budweiser, a pint of raw ether, and two dozen amyls."
Coming to terms with the failure of the 1960s countercultural movement is a major theme of the novel, and the book was greeted with considerable critical acclaim, including being heralded by the New York Times as "by far the best book yet written on the decade of dope". "The Vegas Book", as Thompson referred to it, was a mainstream success and introduced his Gonzo journalism techniques to the masses.
Within the next year, Thompson wrote extensively for Rolling Stone while covering the election campaigns of President Richard Nixon and his unsuccessful opponent, Senator George McGovern. The articles were soon combined and published as Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72. As the title suggests, Thompson spent nearly all of his time traveling the "campaign trail", focusing largely on the Democratic Party's primaries (Nixon, as an incumbent, performed little campaign work) in which McGovern competed with rival candidates Edmund Muskie and Hubert Humphrey. Thompson was an early supporter of McGovern, and it could be argued that his unflattering coverage of the rival campaigns in the increasingly widely read Rolling Stone played a role in the senator's nomination.
Thompson went on to become a fierce critic of Nixon, both during and after his presidency. After Nixon's death in 1994, Thompson famously described him in Rolling Stone as a man who "could shake your hand and stab you in the back at the same time" and said "his casket should have been launched into one of those open-sewage canals that empty into the ocean just south of Los Angeles. He was a swine of a man and a jabbering dupe of a president. He was an evil man—evil in a way that only those who believe in the physical reality of the Devil can understand it." The one passion they shared was a love of football, which is discussed in Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72.
Thompson was to provide Rolling Stone similar coverage for the 1976 Presidential Campaign that would appear in a book published by the magazine. Reportedly, as Thompson was waiting for a $75,000 advance cheque to arrive, he learned that Rolling Stone publisher Jann Wenner had pulled the plug on the endeavor without telling Thompson.
Wenner then asked Thompson to travel to Vietnam to report on what appeared to be the closing of the Vietnam War. Thompson accepted, and left for Saigon immediately. He arrived with the country in chaos, just as the United States was preparing to evacuate and other journalists were scrambling to find transportation out of the region. While there, Thompson learned that Wenner had pulled the plug on this excursion as well, and Thompson found himself in Vietnam without health insurance or additional financial support. Thompson's story about the fall of Saigon would not be published in Rolling Stone until ten years later.
These two incidents severely strained the relationship between the author and the magazine, and Thompson contributed far less to the publication in later years.
The year 1980 marked both his divorce from Sandra Conklin and the release of Where the Buffalo Roam, a loose film adaptation of situations from Thompson's early 1970s work, with Bill Murray starring as the author. Murray would go on to become one of Thompson's only trusted friends . After the lukewarm reception of the film, Thompson temporarily relocated to Hawaii to work on a book, The Curse of Lono, a Gonzo-style account of a marathon held in that state. Extensively illustrated by Ralph Steadman, the piece first appeared in Running magazine in 1981 as "The Charge of the Weird Brigade" and was excerpted in Playboy in 1983.
On July 21, 1981, in Aspen, Colorado, Thompson was pulled over for running a stop sign at 2 a.m., and began to "rave" at a state trooper. He also refused to submit to intoxication tests. Consequently he was arrested, but the drunk-driving charges against him were later dropped.
In 1983, he covered the U.S. invasion of Grenada but would not discuss these experiences until the publication of Kingdom of Fear 20 years later. Later that year he authored a piece for Rolling Stone called "A Dog Took My Place", an exposé of the scandalous Roxanne Pulitzer divorce and what he termed the "Palm Beach lifestyle." The article contained dubious insinuations of bestiality (among other things) but was considered to be a return to proper form by many.
Shortly thereafter, Thompson accepted an advance to write about "couples pornography" for Playboy. As part of his research, in the spring of 1985 he spent evenings at the Mitchell Brothers O'Farrell Theater striptease club in San Francisco and his experience there eventually evolved into a full-length nonfiction novel tentatively titled The Night Manager. Neither the novel nor the article has been published.
At the behest of old friend and editor Warren Hinckle, Thompson became a media critic for the San Francisco Examiner from the mid-1980s until the end of that decade. Thompson's editor at the Examiner, David McCumber (who would write a Mitchell brothers biography not long after Jim Mitchell fatally shot his brother Art in 1991), was reportedly deeply disappointed in the quality of Thompson's Examiner columns.
In 1990 former porn director Gail Palmer visited Thompson's home in Woody Creek. She later accused him of sexual assault, claiming that he twisted her breast when she refused to join him in the hot tub. She also described cocaine use to authorities. A six person 11 hour search of Thompson's home turned up various kinds of drugs and a few sticks of dynamite. All charges were dismissed after a pre-trial hearing. Thompson would later describe this experience at length in Kingdom of Fear.
By the early 1990s Thompson was said to be working on a novel called Polo Is My Life, which was briefly excerpted in Rolling Stone in 1994, and which Thompson himself described in 1996 as "...a sex book — you know, sex, drugs and rock and roll. It's about the manager of a sex theater who's forced to leave and flee to the mountains. He falls in love and gets in even more trouble than he was in the sex theater in San Francisco". The novel was slated to be released by Random House in 1999, and was even assigned ISBN 0-679-40694-8, but was not published.
Thompson continued to contribute irregularly to Rolling Stone. "Fear and Loathing in Elko", published in 1992, was a well-received fictional rallying cry against Clarence Thomas, while "Mr. Bill's Neighborhood" was a largely non-fictional account of an interview with Bill Clinton in an Arkansas diner. Rather than embarking on the campaign trail as he had done in previous presidential elections, Thompson monitored the proceedings from cable television; Better Than Sex: Confessions of a Political Junkie, his account of the 1992 Presidential Election campaign, is composed of reactionary faxes sent to Rolling Stone. A decade later, he contributed "Fear and Loathing, Campaign 2004"—an account of a road jaunt with John Kerry during his presidential campaign that would be Thompson's final magazine feature.
Thompson was named a Kentucky Colonel by the Governor of Kentucky in a December 1996 tribute ceremony where he also received keys to the city of Louisville.
Despite publishing a novel and numerous newspaper and magazine articles, the majority of Thompson's literary output after the late 1970s took the form of a 4-volume series of books called The Gonzo Papers. Beginning with The Great Shark Hunt in 1979 and ending with Better Than Sex in 1994, the series is largely a collection of rare newspaper and magazine pieces from the pre-gonzo period, along with almost all of his Rolling Stone short pieces, excerpts from the Fear and Loathing... books, and so on.
By the late 1970s Thompson received complaints from critics, fans and friends that he was regurgitating his past glories without much new on his part; these concerns are alluded to in the introduction of The Great Shark Hunt, where Thompson suggested that his "old self" committed suicide.
Perhaps in response to this, as well as the strained relationship with Rolling Stone, and the failure of his marriage, Thompson became more reclusive after 1980. He would often retreat to his compound in Woody Creek and reject assignments or refuse to complete them. Despite the dearth of new material, Wenner kept Thompson on the Rolling Stone masthead as chief of the "National Affairs Desk", a position he would hold until his death.
Thompson's work was popularized again with the 1998 release of the film Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, which opened to considerable fanfare. The novel was reprinted to coincide with the film, and Thompson's work was introduced to a new generation of readers.
Soon thereafter, Thompson's "long lost" novel The Rum Diary was published, as were the first two volumes of his collected letters, which were greeted with critical acclaim.
Thompson's next, and penultimate, collection, Kingdom of Fear, was a combination of new material, selected newspaper clippings, and some older works. Released in 2003, it was perceived by critics to be an angry, vitriolic commentary on the passing of the American Century and the state of affairs after the September 2001 attacks.
Hunter married Anita Bejmuk, his long-time assistant, on April 23, 2003.
Thompson ended his journalism career in the same way it had begun: writing about sports. Thompson penned a weekly column called "Hey, Rube" for ESPN.com's "Page 2". The column ran from 2000 to shortly before his death in 2005. Simon & Schuster bundled many of the columns from the first few years and released it in mid-2004 as Hey Rube: Blood Sport, the Bush Doctrine, and the Downward Spiral of Dumbness - Modern History from the Sports Desk.
Thompson died at his self-described "fortified compound" known as "Owl Farm" in Woody Creek, Colorado, at 5:42 p.m. on February 20, 2005, from a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head.
Thompson's son (Juan), daughter-in-law (Jennifer Winkel Thompson) and grandson (Will Thompson) were visiting for the weekend at the time of his suicide. Will and Jennifer were in the adjacent room when they heard the gunshot. Mistaking the shot for the sound of a book falling, they continued with their activities for a few minutes before checking on him. The police report concerning his death stated that in a typewriter in front of Thompson, they found "a piece of paper carrying the date 'Feb 22 '05' and the single word 'counselor'."
They reported to the press that they do not believe his suicide was out of desperation, but was a well-thought out act resulting from Thompson's many painful and chronic medical conditions. Thompson's wife, Anita, who was at a gym at the time of her husband's death, was on the phone with him when he ended his life.
What family and police describe as a suicide note was written by Thompson four days before his death, and left for his wife. It was later published by Rolling Stone. Titled "Football Season Is Over", it read:
"No More Games. No More Bombs. No More Walking. No More Fun. No More Swimming. 67. That is 17 years past 50. 17 more than I needed or wanted. Boring. I am always bitchy. No Fun — for anybody. 67. You are getting Greedy. Act your old age. Relax — This won't hurt."
Artist and friend Ralph Steadman wrote:
"...He told me 25 years ago that he would feel real trapped if he didn't know that he could commit suicide at any moment. I don't know if that is brave or stupid or what, but it was inevitable. I think that the truth of what rings through all his writing is that he meant what he said. If that is entertainment to you, well, that's OK. If you think that it enlightened you, well, that's even better. If you wonder if he's gone to Heaven or Hell, rest assured he will check out them both, find out which one Richard Milhous Nixon went to — and go there. He could never stand being bored. But there must be Football too — and Peacocks..."
On August 20, 2005, in a private ceremony, Thompson's ashes were fired from a cannon atop a tower of his own design (in the shape of a double-thumbed fist clutching a peyote button) to the tune of Norman Greenbaum's "Spirit in the Sky" and Bob Dylan's Mr. Tambourine Man. Red, white, blue, and green fireworks were launched along with his ashes. As the city of Aspen would not allow the cannon to remain for more than a month, the cannon has been dismantled and put into storage until a suitable permanent location can be found. According to his widow Anita, Thompson's funeral was financed by actor Johnny Depp, a close friend of Thompson. Depp told the Associated Press, "All I'm doing is trying to make sure his last wish comes true. I just want to send my pal out the way he wants to go out."
Other famous attendees at the funeral included U.S. Senator John Kerry and former U.S. Senator George McGovern; 60 Minutes correspondent Ed Bradley and Charlie Rose; actors Jack Nicholson, Bill Murray, Benicio del Toro, Sean Penn, and Josh Hartnett; singers Lyle Lovett, John Oates and numerous other friends. An estimated 280 people attended the funeral.
The plans for this monument were initially drawn by Thompson and Ralph Steadman and were shown as part of an Omnibus program on the BBC entitled Fear and Loathing in Gonzovision (1978). It is included as a special feature on the second disc of the 2003 Criterion Collection DVD release of Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (labeled on the DVD as "Fear and Loathing on the Road to Hollywood"). The video footage of Steadman and Thompson drawing the plans and outdoor footage showing where he wanted the cannon constructed were planned prior to the unveiling of his cannon at the funeral.
Thompson is often credited as the creator of Gonzo journalism, a style of writing that blurs distinctions between fiction and nonfiction. His work and style are considered to be a major part of the New Journalism literary movement of the 1960s and 1970s, which attempted to break free from the purely objective style of mainstream reportage of the time. Thompson almost always wrote in the first person, while extensively using his own experiences and emotions to color "the story" he was trying to follow. His writing aimed to be humorous, colorful and bizarre, and he often exaggerated events to be more entertaining.
The term Gonzo has since been applied in kind to numerous other forms of highly subjective artistic expression.
Despite his having personally described his work as "Gonzo", it fell to later observers to articulate what the phrase actually meant. While Thompson's approach clearly involved injecting himself as a participant in the events of the narrative, it also involved adding invented, metaphoric elements, thus creating, for the uninitiated reader, a seemingly confusing amalgam of facts and fiction notable for the deliberately blurred lines between one and the other. Thompson, in a 1974 Interview in Playboy addressed the issue himself, saying "Unlike Tom Wolfe or Gay Talese, I almost never try to reconstruct a story. They’re both much better reporters than I am, but then, I don’t think of myself as a reporter." Tom Wolfe would later describe Thompson's style as "...part journalism and part personal memoir admixed with powers of wild invention and wilder rhetoric."
The majority of Thompson's most popular and acclaimed work appeared within the pages of Rolling Stone magazine. Along with Joe Eszterhas and David Felton, Thompson was instrumental in expanding the focus of the magazine past music criticism; indeed, Thompson was the only staff writer of the epoch never to contribute a music feature to the magazine. Nevertheless, his articles were always peppered with a wide array of pop music references ranging from Howlin' Wolf to Lou Reed. Armed with early fax machines wherever he went, he became notorious for haphazardly sending sometimes illegible material to the magazine's San Francisco offices as an issue was about to go to press.
Robert Love, Thompson's editor of 23 years at Rolling Stone, wrote that "the dividing line between fact and fancy rarely blurred, and we didn’t always use italics or some other typographical device to indicate the lurch into the fabulous. But if there were living, identifiable humans in a scene, we took certain steps....
Hunter was close friends with many prominent Democrats, veterans of the ten or more presidential campaigns he covered, so when in doubt, we’d call the press secretary. 'People will believe almost any twisted kind of story about politicians or Washington,' he once said, and he was right."
Discerning the line between the fact and the fiction of Thompson's work presented a practical problem for editors and fact-checkers of his work. Love called fact-checking Thompson's work "one of the sketchiest occupations ever created in the publishing world", and "for the first-timer ... a trip through a journalistic fun house, where you didn’t know what was real and what wasn’t. You knew you had better learn enough about the subject at hand to know when the riff began and reality ended. Hunter was a stickler for numbers, for details like gross weight and model numbers, for lyrics and caliber, and there was no faking it."
Thompson often used a blend of fiction and fact when portraying himself in his writing as well, sometimes using the name Raoul Duke as an author surrogate whom he generally described as a callous, erratic, self-destructive journalist who constantly drank alcohol and took hallucinogenic drugs. Fantasizing about causing bodily harm to others was also a characteristic in his work used to comedic effect and an example of his brand of humor.
In the late sixties, Thompson obtained his famous title of "Doctor" from the Universal Life Church. He later preferred to be called Dr. Thompson, and his "alter-ego" Raoul Duke called himself a "doctor of journalism". Thompson was as fond of personae as W.C. Fields: besides "Raoul Duke", Thompson also toyed with the idea of taking the names "Jefferson Rank", "Gene Skinner", and "Sebastian Owl" for various purposes literary and non-literary, naming his "compound" in Woody Creek, Colorado, "Owl Farm" after the last of these.
A number of critics have commented that as he grew older the line that distinguished Thompson from his literary self became increasingly blurred. Thompson himself admitted during a 1978 BBC interview that he sometimes felt pressured to live up to the fictional self that he had created, adding "I'm never sure which one people expect me to be. Very often, they conflict — most often, as a matter of fact. ...I'm leading a normal life and right along side me there is this myth, and it is growing and mushrooming and getting more and more warped. When I get invited to, say, speak at universities, I'm not sure if they are inviting Duke or Thompson. I'm not sure who to be."
Thompson's writing style and eccentric persona gave him a cult following in both literary and drug circles, and his cult status expanded into broader areas after being twice portrayed in major motion pictures. Hence, both his writing style and persona have been widely imitated, and his likeness has even become a popular costume choice for Halloween.
In the documentary Breakfast With Hunter, Hunter S. Thompson is seen in several scenes wearing different Che Guevara t-shirts. Additionally, actor and friend Benicio del Toro has stated that Thompson kept a "big" picture of Che in his kitchen.
Thompson wrote passionately on behalf of African American rights and the African American Civil Rights Movement. He strongly criticised the dominance in American society of, what he called, "white power structures". He was a proponent of the right to bear arms and privacy rights. A member of the National Rifle Association, Thompson was also co-creator of "The Fourth Amendment Foundation", an organization to assist victims in defending themselves against unwarranted search and seizure.
Part of his work with The Fourth Amendment Foundation centered around support of Lisl Auman, a Colorado woman who was sentenced for life in 1997 under felony murder charges for the death of police officer Bruce VanderJagt, despite contradictory statements and dubious evidence. Thompson organized rallies, provided legal support, and co-wrote an article in the June 2004 issue of Vanity Fair, outlining the case. The Colorado Supreme Court eventually overturned Auman's sentence in March 2005, shortly after Thompson's death, and Auman is now free. Auman's supporters claim Thompson's support and publicity resulted in the successful appeal.
Thompson was a firearms and explosives enthusiast (in his writing and in real life) and owned a vast collection of handguns, rifles, shotguns, and various automatic and semi-automatic weapons, along with numerous forms of gaseous crowd control and many other homemade devices.
Thompson was also an ardent supporter of drug legalization and became known for his less-than-shy accounts of his own drug usage. He was an early supporter of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws and served on the group's advisory board for over 30 years until his death. He told an interviewer in 1997 that drugs should be legalized "Across the board. It might be a little rough on some people for a while, but I think it's the only way to deal with drugs. Look at Prohibition: all it did was make a lot of criminals rich."
After the September 11, 2001 attacks, Thompson voiced skepticism regarding the official story on who was responsible for the attacks. He suggested to several interviewers that it may have been conducted by the U.S. Government or with the government's assistance. In 2002, Thompson told a radio show host "You sort of wonder when something like that happens, well, who stands to benefit? Who had the opportunity and the motive? You just kind of look at these basic things ... I saw that the US government was going to benefit, and the White House people, the Republican administration to take the mind of the public off the crashing economy. ... And I have spent enough time on the inside of, well in the White House and you know, campaigns and I've known enough people who do these things, think this way, to know that the public version of the news or whatever event, is never really what happened."
In 2004 Thompson, regarding politics, wrote: "Nixon was a professional politician, and I despised everything he stood for — but if he were running for president this year against the evil Bush–Cheney gang, I would happily vote for him."
Thompson wrote many letters and they were his primary means of personal conversation. Thompson made carbon copies of all his letters, usually typed, a habit that began in his teenage years. His letters were sent to friends, public officials and reporters.
Some of his letters have begun to be published in a series of books called The Fear and Loathing Letters. The first volume, The Proud Highway: Saga of a Desperate Southern Gentleman 1955 - 1967, is over 650 pages, while the second volume Fear and Loathing in America: The Brutal Odyssey of an Outlaw Journalist passed 700. Douglas Brinkley, who edits the letter series, said that for every letter included, fifteen were cut. Brinkley estimated Thompson's own archive to contain over 20,000 letters. According to Amazon.com, the last of the three planned volumes of Thompson's letters was allegedly to be published on January 1, 2007 as The Mutineer: Rants, Ravings, and Missives from the Mountaintop 1977-2005. Anita Thompson has said on herblog that the collection will be released sometime in February. Amazon.com currently lists the publication date on its site as February 1, 2011.
Many biographies have been written about Thompson, although he did not write an autobiography. But his letters contained "asides" to "his biographers" that he assumed could be "reading in" on his collected letters. Some of these letters were already bundled into Thompson's Kingdom of Fear, though it is not considered an autobiography.
Accompanying the eccentric and colorful writing of Hunter Thompson, illustrations by British artist Ralph Steadman offer visual representations of the Gonzo style. Steadman and Thompson developed a close friendship, and often traveled together. Though his illustrations occur in most of Thompson's books, they are conspicuously featured in full page color in Thompson's The Curse of Lono, set in Hawaii.
Thompson was an avid amateur photographer throughout his life and his photos have been exhibited since his death at art galleries in the United States and United Kingdom. In late 2006, AMMO Books published a limited-edition 224 page collection of Thompson photos called GONZO, with an introduction by Johnny Depp. Thompson's snapshots were a combination of the subjects he was covering, stylized self-portraits, and artistic still life photos. The London Observer called the photos "astonishingly good" and that "Thompson's pictures remind us, brilliantly in every sense, of very real people, real colours".
The film Where the Buffalo Roam (1980) depicts Thompson's attempts at writing stories for both the Super Bowl and the 1972 U.S. presidential election. It stars Bill Murray as Thompson and Peter Boyle as Thompson's attorney Oscar Acosta, referred to in the movie as Carl Lazlo, Esq.
The 1998 film adaptation of Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas was directed by Monty Python veteran Terry Gilliam, and starred Johnny Depp (who moved into Hunter's basement to 'study' Thompson's persona before assuming his role in the film) as "Hunter Thompson/Raoul Duke" and Benicio del Toro as Oscar Acosta, referred to in the movie as "Dr. Gonzo". The film has achieved something of a cult following.
A film is currently in production based on Thompson's novel The Rum Diary. It is scheduled for a 2010 release, starring Johnny Depp as the main character, Paul Kemp. The novel's premise was inspired by Thompson's own experiences in Puerto Rico. Bruce Robinson is directing.
"Fear and Loathing on the Road to Hollywood" (1978) is an extended television profile by the BBC. It can be found on disc 2 of "Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas" The Criterion Collection edition.
The Mitchell brothers, owners of the O'Farrell Theatre in San Francisco, made a documentary about Thompson in 1988 called Hunter S. Thompson: The Crazy Never Die.
Wayne Ewing created three documentaries about Thompson. The film Breakfast With Hunter (2003) was directed and edited by Ewing. It documents Thompson's work on the movie Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, his arrest for drunk driving, and his subsequent fight with the court system. When I Die (2005) is a video chronicle of making Thompson's final farewell wishes a reality, and documents the send-off itself. Free Lisl: Fear and Loathing in Denver (2006) chronicles Thompson efforts in helping to free Lisl Auman who was sentenced to life in prison without parole for the shooting of a police officer, a crime she didn't commit. All three films are only available online.
In Come on Down: Searching for the American Dream (2004) Thompson gives director Adamm Liley insight into the nature of the American Dream over drinks at the Woody Creek Tavern.
Buy The Ticket, Take The Ride: Hunter S. Thompson On Film (2006) was directed by Tom Thurman, written by Tom Marksbury, and produced by the Starz Entertainment Group. The original documentary features interviews with Thompson's inner circle of family and friends, but the thrust of the film focuses on the manner in which his life often overlapped with numerous Hollywood celebrities who became his close friends, such as Johnny Depp, Benicio del Toro, Bill Murray, Sean Penn, John Cusack, Thompson's wife Anita, son Juan, former Senators George McGovern and Gary Hart, writers Tom Wolfe and William F. Buckley, actors Gary Busey and Harry Dean Stanton, and the illustrator Ralph Steadman among others.
"Blasted!!! The Gonzo Patriots of Hunter S. Thompson" (2006), produced, directed, photographed and edited by Blue Kraning, is a documentary about the scores of fans who volunteered their privately owned artillery to fire the ashes of the late author, Hunter S Thompson. Blasted!!! premiered at the 2006 Starz Denver International Film Festival, part of a tribute series to Hunter S. Thompson held at the Denver Press Club.
In 2008, Academy Award-winning documentarian Alex Gibney (Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room, Taxi to the Dark Side) wrote and directed a documentary on Thompson, entitled Gonzo: The Life and Work of Dr. Hunter S. Thompson. The film premiered on January 20, 2008 at the Sundance Film Festival. Gibney uses intimate, never-before-seen home videos, interviews with friends, enemies and lovers, and clips from films adapted from Thompson's material to document his turbulent life.
GONZO: A Brutal Chrysalis is a one-man show about Hunter S.Thompson written by Paul Addis. Set in the writing den of Thompson's Woody Creek home, the show presents the life of Hunter during the years between 1968 and 1971. Addis played the role of Hunter during the show's original run until his arrest for the Burning Man early torching on August 28, 2007.
Author Tom Wolfe has called Thompson the greatest American comic writer of the 20th century.
The 2006 documentary film Fuck, which features Hunter S Thompson commenting on the usage of that word, is dedicated to his memory.
Thompson appeared on the cover of the 1,000th issue of Rolling Stone (May 18 - June 1, 2006) as a devil playing the guitar next to the two "L"'s in the word "Rolling". Johnny Depp also appeared on the cover.
The Thompson-inspired character Uncle Duke appears on a recurring basis in Doonesbury, the daily newspaper comic strip by Garry Trudeau. When the character was first introduced, Thompson protested, quoted in an interview as saying that he would set Trudeau on fire if the two ever met, although it was reported that he liked the character in later years. Between March 7, 2005 (roughly two weeks after Thompson's suicide) and March 12, 2005, Doonesbury ran a tribute to Hunter, with Uncle Duke lamenting the death of the man he called his "inspiration." The first of these strips featured a panel with artwork similar to that of Ralph Steadman, and later strips featured various non sequiturs (with Duke variously transforming into a monster, melting, shrinking to the size of an empty drinking glass, or people around him turning into animals) which seemed to mirror some of the effects of hallucinogenic drugs described in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas.
Besides Uncle Duke, Thompson served as the inspiration for two other comic strip characters. Underground comix creator turned animation/cartooning historian Scott Shaw! used an anthropomorphic dog named "Pointer X. Toxin" in a number of his works. Matt Howarth has created a number of comic books in his "Bugtown" universe with a Thompson-inspired character named "Monseiuer Boche", as well as a musician named "Savage Henry", the name of a drug dealer (or "scag baron") mentioned in Fear and Loathing In Las Vegas.
Spider Jerusalem, the gonzo journalist protagonist of Warren Ellis's Transmetropolitan, is largely based on Thompson.
Adult Swim's animated series The Venture Bros. featured a character named Hunter Gathers (who looks and acts much like Thompson) employed by the fictional Office of Secret Intelligence as a trainer.
Flying Dog Brewery is a self-proclaimed "gonzo brewery" started by Hunter's long time friend and neighbor George Stranahan. Flying Dog's Gonzo Imperial Porter is a tribute to Hunter. All the bottle labels are designed by Ralph Steadman.
Los Angeles based indie rock band Fat City Reprise's name is a tribute to Thompson's failed bid for sheriff of Pitkin County, Colorado in 1970.
American heavy metal band Avenged Sevenfold wrote their song Bat Country in tribute to Thompson. It was featured on their 2005 album City of Evil and uses the quote "He who makes a beast out of himself gets rid of the pain of being a man".

Birth Asphyxia caused by a reduction in the supply of blood or oxygen to a baby's brain during birth is a major cause of death and brain damage, occurring in approximately 1 per 1000 births and causing around 20% of all cases of cerebral palsy. Brain hypothermia, induced by cooling a baby to around 33 degrees C for 3 days after birth has recently been proven to be the only medical intervention which reduces brain damage and improves an infant's chance of normal survival after birth asphyxia. 
Many physicians over the centuries have tried to resuscitate babies after birth by altering their body temperatures, essentially aiming to animate the infant by inducing the onset of breathing. Little thought was given to brain protection, because cerebral hypoxia during birth was not linked with later neurological problems until William John Little in 1861, and even then this was controversial; Sigmund Freud, for example, famously disagreed, and when scientific studies of neonatal therapeutic hypothermia were begun in the 1950s researchers like Bjorn Westin still reported their work in terms of re-animation rather than neuroprotection. Investigators such as James Miller and Clement Smith carried out clinical observations and careful physiological experiments, but although some babies were conscientiously followed up, they were not mainly concerned with long term neurological outcome. 
However, by the 1960s physicians saw hypothermia after delivery was something to be avoided. The problem of infants who failed to breath at birth had been solved by the invention of mechanical ventilation, so any benefit cooling might have for re-animation was no longer needed, and an influential trial showed that keeping small and preterm infants warm increased survival. These results, together with observational and experimental data made it an article of medical faith for decades that babies should not be allowed to get cold. 
Consequently during the next two decades studies of neonatal hypothermia in Europe and the USA were sporadic and often unsuccessful. An interest in cooling for brain protection was beginning to emerge, but contemporary neuroscience provided few useful concepts to guide this research and little progress was made.. Although across the Iron Curtain in the Soviet Union cooling was being applied empirically following birth asphyxia , the language barrier, cold war politics and the Russians’ failure to carry out randomised controlled trials contributed to an almost total ignorance of this work in the West. Indeed a group of Russian neonatologists who described hypothermic neural rescue during a visit to the Neonatal Unit in Bristol, UK, met with little interest 
In the late 1980s the development of a new set of concepts and problems led to a re-examination. A new generation of neonatal researchers were influenced by the growing evidence that protecting the brain against the effects of oxygen deprivation during labour might be possible. These researchers were aware that cooling produced powerful intra-ischaemic neuroprotection during cardiac surgery but a new concept of hypothermic post-insult neural rescue developed. This shift in thinking was possible because of at least three major new ideas that were developing at the same time: delayed post-ischaemic cell death; excitotoxicity; and apoptosis.
The first paradigm shift that affected neonatal researchers in particular was the idea that if a baby was resuscitated after cerebral hypoxia-ischaemia there was a period of time before brain cells started to die. Osmund Reynolds at University College London used the newly developed technique of Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) to show that the infant brain metabolism is normal in the hours after birth asphyxia and deteriorated only after a distinct delay. Robert Vannucci confirmed the effect with painstaking biochemistry, and delayed injury was also reported in neuropathological studies. 
Delayed brain injury (called ‘secondary energy failure’ by Reynolds) was a critical new idea. If brain cells remained normal for a time and the mechanism of the delayed death could be unravelled, it opened the possibility of therapeutic intervention in what had previously seemed an impossible situation. 
The new and transforming concept of excitotoxicity developed from the seminal experiments of John Olney and Brian Meldrum. They showed that at least some of the neural cell death caused by hypoxia-ischaemia is mediated by excess production of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, and that pharmacological blockade of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor could provide good protection against hypoxic damage. Olney and Meldrum had shifted the paradigm, allowing researchers to think of hypoxic-ischaemic damage as a treatable disease.
However, it was still a mystery how and why cells triggered by hypoxia-ischaemia should die hours or days later, particularly when it became clear that glutamate levels were not particularly high during secondary energy failure. The next critical idea came with the discovery of programmed cell death, a novel form of cell suicide. Originally observed as a pathological appearance and named apoptosis (“falling off", as of leaves) in the 1970’s, Horvitz, Raff and Evan provided a molecular understanding and showed that apoptosis could be triggered by cellular insults. The radical idea that hypoxia-ischaemia triggered a cell suicide programme which could explain the perplexing phenomenon of delayed cell death was soon supported by experimental and human data, and many researchers believe this helps explain why neural rescue works in the newborn. However the picture is complex: both apoptosis and necrosis are present in variable proportions ; and there seems to be prolonged neurodegeneration after an insult . Research into this problem continues.
These ideas flowed through the perinatal research community, producing a new belief that neural rescue after birth asphyxia should be possible. Amongst the first to have attempt neonatal neural rescue in animals were Ingmar Kjellmer and Henrik Hagberg in Gothenburg, and Michael Johnston in Baltimore. The potential began to draw in other neonatal researchers from diverse fields to begin neuroprotection research, including those who came to form the informal neonatal hypothermia research group: 
Peter Gluckman and Tania Gunn were endocrinologists in the University of Auckland New Zealand and interested in cooling for its effect on thyroid function; they had first cooled a sheep fetus for endocrine studies in 1983. Denis Azzopardi, John Wyatt and David Edwards, then young researchers working for Reynolds, were using Reynolds’s sophisticated MRS approach to replicate secondary energy failure in newborn piglets and immature rats; in Gluckman’s laboratory Alistair Gunn and Chris Williams developed a simple and elegant biophysical method using cerebral impedance to do essentially the same thing in fetal sheep . Marianne Thoresen, who was working on cerebral perfusion, was prompted to think about neuroprotection by stories of children who fell through the Norwegian ice and suffering prolonged drowning in iced water but emerged with preserved cerebral function.
There were many potential therapies around which might achieve neural rescue, and most of these workers did not immediately move to hypothermia. Magnesium was an appealingly simple excitoxin receptor antagonist that protected cells in culture: the Reynolds group tested it in their piglet model without success. Gluckman and Gunn started by looking unsuccessfully at flunarizine, a calcium entry inhibitor. Edwards picked on nitric oxide synthase inhibition which was also a failure. Gluckman had success with his innovative studies of IGF-1, but could not immediately translate this to clinical practice.
Most neonatal researchers recognise work published in 1989 from Myron Ginsberg’s group as starting point of their interest in post-insult hypothermia. Ginsberg showed that a short period of hypothermia after hypoxia-ischaemia in adult rats produced significant protection in the hippocampus. Soon Pusanelli’s group suggested that at least some of the strong neuroprotective effect of the canonical glutamate antagonist MK-801 was by reducing body temperature. Before long there was a significant body of experimental work on post-ischaemic neuroprotection by hypothermia in mature animals . These results also stimulated clinical scientists working with adults, who had apparent early success in clinical trials. 
The informal neonatal hypothermia interest group was developing: Gluckman visited London; Reynolds and Wyatt went to Oslo; Edwards went to Auckland; and Thoresen contacted Westin, then went to work in the Reynolds laboratory. Over the next year or so together and separately they produced a series of reports in piglets, immature rats and fetal sheep which showed repeatedly that post-insult hypothermia significantly reduced hypoxic-ischaemic brain damage in the developing brain. Trying to understand how and why cooling might work, they showed that it specifically reduced apoptosis, and interrupted the excitiotoxic cascade.
Thoresen recalls the immediacy of the first hypothermia experiment in the Reynolds laboratory. The room was full and she watched with Reynolds, Wyatt, Edwards and others as the biomarkers remained stubbornly normal after a very severe hypoxic insult which would normally have caused catastrophic secondary energy failure. In New Zealand there were similar experiences: Gunn says that he realised that hypothermia was going to work during his third experiment, as he watched the expected delayed injury fail to materialise.
As the experimental data continued to accumulate, clinical pilot studies were already being organised, although with some trepidation because of the prevailing view that cold was very dangerous for infants. There was some controversy over the relative benefits of selective head against whole body cooling. Tania and Alistair Gunn, first out of the clinical blocks, set out in Auckland to study local head cooling which they argued would have fewer side effects; Edwards and Azzopardi, now based at Hammersmith Hospital, delayed clinical studies until they had used a computer model to decide between the two then started whole body cooling; Thoresen and Andrew Whitelaw, relocated from Oslo to Bristol tried both methods. 
Cooling was now a topic of wider discussion in the neonatal community and other groups started to organise further experimental and further preliminary clinical studies, (reviewed in Jacobs et al ). 
However, not everyone was convinced. The highly respected Vannucci laboratory had failed to find any protective effect of post-insult cooling, and worse, Ginsberg’s group reported that hypothermic protection in mature rats was only temporary. Many clinicians thought that the experiments models were over simplistic and unrepresentitive of the complex clinical situation. Others thought that brain damage might have occurred weeks or months earlier; although an MRI study from Hammersmith dispelled this myth 
Nevertheless, cooling captured the imagination of one of the most influential figures in Neonatal Medicine. Jerry Lucey, the editor of the top-rated pediatric journal Pediatrics, had an extraordinary ability to spot new ideas, and he became a strong champion of cooling. He promoted hypothermia tirelessly, and in early 1997 made a critical introduction between Olympic Medical, a medium sized equipment company, and the cooling fraternity. In 1997, in his car on the way to Dulles International Airport after a series of meetings largely organised by Lucey, Jay Jones the owner of Olympic Medical decided to fund a randomised controlled trial of hypothermic neural rescue therapy in newborn infants. Olympic would construct a head cooling device, the Olympic Cool-Cap System, and provide practical and financial support for the trial. Gluckman and Wyatt would be principal investigators and the scientific committee which developed and ran the trial joined hypothermia researchers like Edwards and Whitelaw, with new experts Donna Ferriero, Richard Polin, Roberta Ballard and Charlene Robertson. The newcomers were not all convinced baby-coolers; Ferriero, also a distinguished neuroprotection experimentalist, was particularly sceptical; but they brought a range of new skills essential to taking hypothermia into a major randomised trial. Arguably the most important roles in delivering the trial were taken by Ted Weiler, an indefatigable engineer from Olympic Medical, and Gunn who became the Scientific Officer. 
The CoolCap study studied cooling for 72 hours started within 6 hours of delivery. The protocol was based on the Auckland pilot studies, but was somewhat arbitrary; the relative merits of different temperatures or lengths of cooling were unclear, and the researchers used best estimates based on their animal experiments, cautiously choosing the upper band of the expected therapeutic range. No-one knew with certainty what effect size to predicit or even what the best primary outcome was. On the divisive question of selective head versus whole body cooling, in the almost total absence of useful data they compromised and used rectal temperature to control a head cooling device. CoolCap thus studied the effect of cooling the whole baby to 34.5oC with the expectation (some said hope) that the brain might be a degree or so cooler.
The first infant was enrolled at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, on July 1, 1999 and all data were collected, audited, and prepared for analysis by fall 2003. The result was reported at Lucey's annual Washington, D.C. 'Hot Topics in Neonatology' meeting in December 2003 with full publication in The Lancet in 2005. CoolCap showed a non-significant trend to improvement with cooling in the primary outcome of death or disability at 18 months overall, but a clear and significant benefit when infants with very severe or long established brain injury were excluded. This was not quite the definitive result they hoped for, but the researchers remained resolute; Gluckman confided to Edwards as they relaxed together after the data presentation in Washington, that he thought they would never do more important work.
After the CoolCap trial another major study was published by the National Institute for Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) Neonatal Research Network. The CoolCap researchers had previously had lengthy discussions with the network about collaboration because although the network had no experience of hypothermia they had a strong track record of patient recruitment. However after detailed discussions around the final CoolCap protocol broke down, the Network began a separate trial led by Seetha Shankaran. Some network members were setting up animal models of hypothermic neural rescue, providing valuable experience for preliminary experiments. The NICHD trial found a significant effect of cooling, although the study was criticised in some quarters for temperature instability in the control group.
The question which now faced the community was: should cooling become standard of care? Opinions were divided. Some observers thought the evidence was sufficient, particularly if the growing number of pilot or smaller studies were considered and in December 2006 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the Olympic Cool-Cap System for clinical use. However others pointed out that the results were at best statistically marginal and urged scepticism. Worryingly, hypothermia trials for head trauma in adults and older children were failing to show benefit. A review meeting organised by NICHD advised that cooling was an emerging therapy but not standard of care; the community awaited more data.
After a couple of years during which even the original researchers found it difficult always to agree, the last major trial that had grown out of the original experimentalist group was completed. The TOtal BodY hypothermia for pernatal asphyxia trial (TOBY), led by Azzopardi backed by distinguished trials specialist Peter Brocklehurst and the UK National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, developed from the Hammersmith pilot study of whole body cooling, but collected the data needed to allow meta-analysis with both CoolCap and the NICHD studies. TOBY had the 'advantage' of being delayed in starting by the funding timetable of the UK Medical Research Council, so that it was still in progress when CoolCap and the NICHD trial reported marginal benefits, making it clear that the trial size should be increased. When TOBY reported it was considerably larger than either previous study and yet showed remarkable consistency with both those trials; the point estimate for effect was similar and meta-analysis (detailed below) showed unequivocally that cooling increases an infants chance of surviving without neurological deficits at 18 months and reduces neurodevelopmental impairment in survival.
The memories of some of the researchers involved in bringing hypothermic neural rescue into clinical practice have recently been collated.
Much of what is known about the mechanisms of hypothermic neuroprotection is gathered from studies in mature and adult models. What follows uses some of these data while trying to focus on the immature brain. More information, particularly on adults, is given in the article Therapeutic hypothermia.
Cerebral hypoxia-ischaemia results in reduced cerebral oxidative metabolism, cerebral lactic acidosis and cell membrane ionic transport failure; if prolonged there is necrotic cell death. Although rapid recovery of cerebral energy metabolism occurs following successful resuscitation this is followed some hours later by a secondary fall in cerebral high energy phosphates accompanied by a rise in intracellular pH, and the characteristic cerebral biochemical disturbance at this stage is a lactic alkalosis. In neonates, the severity of this secondary impairment in cerebral metabolism are associated with abnormal subsequent neurodevelopmental outcome and reduced head growth. 
Several adverse biological events contribute to this secondary deterioration, including: release of excitatory amino acids which activate N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate (AMPA) receptors on neurons (30,37) and oligodendroglial precursors, accumulation of excitatory neurotransmitters, generation of reactive oxygen radicals, intracellular calcium accumulation and mitochondrial dysfunction. Whilst necrotic cell death is prominent in the immediate and acute phases of severe cerebral insults, the predominant mode of death during the delayed phase of injury appears to be apoptosis. Neuroprotective mechanisms need to interact with these mechanisms to have beneficial effect.
Newborn hypoxic-ischaemic brain injury differs from injury in the adult brain in several ways: NMDA receptor toxicity is much higher in the immature brain. Apoptotic mechanisms including activation of caspases, translocation of apoptosis-inducing factor and cytochrome-c release are much greater in the immature than the adult. The inflammatory activation is different with less contribution from polymorphonuclear cells and a more prominent role of IL-18 whereas IL-1, which is critical in the adult brain, is less important. The anti-oxidant system is underdeveloped with reduced capacity to inactivate hydrogen peroxide. 
Mild hypothermia helps prevent disruptions to cerebral metabolism both during and following cerebral insults. Hypothermia decreases the cerebral metabolic rate for glucose and oxygen and reduces the loss of high energy phosphates during hypoxia-ischaemia and during secondary cerebral energy failure, and reduces delayed cerebral lactic alkalosis The simultaneous increase in cytotoxic oedema and loss of cerebral cortical activity that accompanies secondary energy failure is also prevented. 
Hypothermia appears to have multiple effects at a cellular level following cerebral injury. Hypothermia reduces vasogenic oedema, haemorrhage and neutrophil infiltration after trauma. The release of excitatory neurotransmitters is reduced, limiting intracellular calcium accumulation. Free radical production is lessened, which protects cells and cellular organelles from oxidative damage during reperfusion. In addition mild hypothermia may reduce the activation of the cytokine and coagulation cascades through increased activation of suppressor signalling pathways, and by inhibiting release of platelet activating factor.
Many of the effects induced by mild hypothermia may help to reduce the number of cells undergoing apoptosis. Experimental and clinical studies indicate that the number of apoptotic neurons is reduced caspase activity is lessened and cytochrome c translocation is diminished by mild hypothermia , and there may be an increase in expression of the anti-apoptotic protein BCl-2. 
Approximately 1000 patients have now been studied in randomised controlled trials of hypothermia, There is ongoing surveillance of hypothermia-treated patients through the TOBY registry in the United Kingdom, and also some data collection of neonatal encephalopathy data by the Vermont-Oxford database in the United States. It is possible therefore to reach some firm conclusions on the clinical value of hypothermia:
A number of randomised controlled trials have now been carried out. Early synthesis of the available data by the Cochrane Collaboration suggested that there was a beneficial effect but did not provide unequivocal support for general application . However a meta-analysis of all studies published in late 2009 included new data, in particular the TOBY trial, and this provided conclusive evidence that cooling reduces the adverse effects of birth asphyxia. 
This analysis found three trials, the CoolCap, NICHD and TOBY trials which measured neurological outcome at least 18 months after birth. These trials report a total of 767 infants. Taken together they showed a significant benefit of cooling with a significant reduction in death or disability at 18 months after birth: typical Risk Ratio, 0.81 (95% Confidence Intervals, 0.71, 0.93), P=0.002. Treatment with hypothermia was consistently associated with an increased rate of normal survival survival: typical Risk Ratio, 1.53 (95% Confidence Intervals, 1.22, 1.93), P <0.001. There was a significant reduction in cerebral palsy amongst infants treated with hypothermia compared with controls. The relative effects of selective head and whole body cooling seem indistinguishable.
11 trials reported mortality rates after cooling. Meta-analysis of these data showed that fewer infants treated with prolonged moderate hypothermia died: typical Risk Ratio 0.78 (95% Confidence Interval, 0.66, 0.93) P=0.004.
While most observers currently regard hypothermic neural rescue therapy as an evidence-based clinical treatment which increases any individual child's chance of surviving without brain damage detectable at 18 months by about 50%, there remains much that is unknown. Long-term follow-up is in progress to ensure that the benefits persist, although an imaging study nested in TOBY also found reduced brain tissue damage in cooled infants which is encouraging It is not clear if cooling initiated later will be beneficial, and the NICHD network has set out to investigate this. The ICE trial, a pragmatic study which emphasises the role of transport, is awaited. Trials are beginning of therapies added to cooling, such as Xenon gas or erythropoietin. 
The simplicity which attracted empyricists to cooling centuries ago now makes hypothermic neural rescue a potentially transforming therapy for low-resource environments where birth asphyxia remains a major cause of death and disability. Ironically this brings back the problem of cooling infants in an environment where modern resuscitation and intensive care are not available.
Influences on Karl Marx are commonly referred to as deriving from three sources: German idealist philosophy, French socialism, and English & Scottish political economy. Although this "three sources" model is an oversimplification, it still has some measure of truth.
Immanuel Kant is believed to have had the greatest influence of any philosopher of modern times. Kantian philosophy was the basis on which the structure of Marxism was built - particularly as it was developed by Georg Hegel. Hegel's dialectical method, which was taken up by Karl Marx, was an extension of the method of reasoning by “antinomies” that Kant used. 
G. W. F. Hegel, by the time of his death, was the most prominent philosopher in Germany. His views were widely taught, and his students were highly regarded. His followers soon divided into right-wing and left-wing Hegelians. Theologically and politically the right-wing Hegelians offered a conservative interpretation of his work. They emphasized the compatibility between Hegel's philosophy and Christianity. Politically, they were orthodox. The left-wing Hegelians eventually moved to an atheistic position. In politics, many of them became revolutionaries. This historically important left-wing group included Ludwig Feuerbach, Bruno Bauer, Friedrich Engels, and Marx. They were often referred to as the Young Hegelians.
Marx's view of history, which came to be called historical materialism, is certainly influenced by Hegel's claim that reality (and history) should be viewed dialectically. Hegel believed that the direction of human history is characterized in the movement from the fragmentary toward the complete and the real (which was also a movement towards greater and greater rationality). Sometimes, Hegel explained, this progressive unfolding of the Absolute involves gradual, evolutionary accretion but at other times requires discontinuous, revolutionary leaps — episodal upheavals against the existing status quo. For example, Hegel strongly opposed slavery in the United States during his lifetime, and he envisioned a time when Christian nations would radically eliminate it from their civilization.
While Marx accepted this broad conception of history, Hegel was an idealist, and Marx sought to rewrite dialectics in materialist terms. He summarized the materialistic aspect of his theory of history in the 1859 preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy:
In this brief popularization of his ideas, Marx emphasized that social development sprang from the inherent contradictions within material life and the social superstructure. This notion is often understood as a simple historical narrative: primitive communism had developed into slave states. Slave states had developed into feudal societies. Those societies in turn became capitalist states, and those states would be overthrown by the self-conscious portion of their working-class, or proletariat, creating the conditions for socialism and, ultimately, a higher form of communism than that with which the whole process began. Marx illustrated his ideas most prominently by the development of capitalism from feudalism, and by the prediction of the development of socialism from capitalism.
Ludwig Feuerbach was a German philosopher and anthropologist. According to Feuerbach, social and political thought should take as their foundation people and their material needs. He held that an individual is the product of their environment, that the whole consciousness of a person is the result of the interaction of sensory organs and the external world. Marx (and Engels) saw in Feuerbach's emphasis on people and human needs a movement toward a materialistic interpretation of society. 
In The Essence of Christianity, Feuerbach argued that God is really a creation of man and that the qualities people attribute to God are really qualities of humanity. Accordingly, Marx argued that it is the material world that is real and that our ideas of it are consequences, not causes, of the world. Thus, like Hegel and other philosophers, Marx distinguished between appearances and reality. However he did not believe that the material world hides from us the "real" world of the ideal; on the contrary, he thought that historically and socially specific ideology prevented people from seeing the material conditions of their lives clearly.
What distinguished Marx from Feuerbach was his view of Feuerbach's humanism as excessively abstract, and so no less ahistorical and idealist than what it purported to replace, namely the reified notion of God found in institutional Christianity that legitimized the repressive power of the Prussian state. Instead, Marx aspired to give ontological priority to what he called the "real life process" of real human beings, as he and Engels said in The German Ideology (1846):
 
Also, in his Theses on Feuerbach (1844), he writes that "the philosophers have only described the world, in various ways, the point is to change it". This opposition between, firstly, various subjective interpretations given by philosophers, which may be, in a sense, compared with Weltanschauung designed to legitimize the current state of affairs, and, secondly, the effective transformation of the world through praxis, which combines theory and practice in a materialist way, is what distinguishes "Marxist philosophers" from the rest of philosophers. Indeed, Marx's break with German Idealism involves a new definition of philosophy; Louis Althusser, founder of "Structural Marxism" in the 1960s, would define it as "class struggle in theory". Marx's movement away from university philosophy and towards the workers' movement is thus inextricably linked to his rupture with his earlier writings, which pushed Marxist commentators to speak of a "young Marx" and a "mature Marx", although the nature of this cut poses problems. A year before the Revolutions of 1848, Marx and Engels thus wrote The Communist Manifesto, which was prepared to an imminent revolution, and ended with the famous cry: "Proletarians of all countries, unite!". However, Marx's thought changed again following Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte's December 2, 1851 coup, which put an end to the French Second Republic and created the Second Empire which would last until the 1870 Franco-Prussian War. Marx thereby modified his theory of alienation exposed in the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 and would latter arrive to his theory of commodity fetishism, exposed in the first chapter of the first book of Das Kapital (1867). This abandonment of the early theory of alienation would be amply discussed, several Marxist theorists, including Marxist humanists such as the Praxis School, would return to it. Others, such as Althusser, would claim that the "epistemological break" between the "young Marx" and the "mature Marx" was such that no comparisons could be done between both works, marking a shift to a "scientific theory" of society.
Marx did not study directly with Hegel, but after Hegel died Marx studied under one of Hegel's pupils, Bruno Bauer, a leader of the circle of Young Hegelians to whom Marx attached himself. However, Marx and Engels came to disagree with Bruno Bauer and the rest of the Young Hegelians about socialism and also about the usage of Hegel's dialectic. From 1841, the young Marx progressively broke away from German idealism and the Young Hegelians. Along with Engels, who observed the Chartist movement in the United Kingdom, he cut away with the environment in which he grew up and encountered the proletariat in France and Germany.
He then wrote a scathing criticism of the Young Hegelians in two books, "The Holy Family" (1845), and The German Ideology (1845), in which he criticized not only Bauer but also Max Stirner's The Ego and Its Own (1844), considered as one of the founding book of individualist anarchism. Max Stirner claimed that all ideals were inherently alienating, and that replacing God by the Humanity, as did Ludwig Feuerbach in The Essence of Christianity (1841), was not sufficient. According to Stirner, any ideals, God, Humanity, the Nation, or even the Revolution alienated the "Ego". Marx also criticized Proudhon, whom had become famous with his cry "Property is theft!", in The Poverty of Philosophy (1845).
Marx's early writings are thus a response towards Hegel, German Idealism and a break with the rest of the Young Hegelians. Marx, "stood Hegel on his head," in his own view of his role, by turning the idealistic dialectic into a materialistic one, in proposing that material circumstances shape ideas, instead of the other way around. In this, Marx was following the lead of Feuerbach. His theory of alienation, developed in the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 (published in 1932), inspired itself from Feuerbach's critique of the alienation of Man in God through the objectivation of all his inherent characteristics (thus man projected on God all qualities which are in fact man's own quality which defines the "human nature"). But Marx also criticized Feuerbach for being insufficiently materialistic, as Stirner himself had point out, and explained that the alienation described by the Young Hegelians was in fact the result of the structure of the economy itself. Furthermore, he criticized Feuerbach's conception of human nature in his sixth thesis on Feuerbach as an abstract "kind" which incarnated itself in each singular individual: "Feuerbach resolves the essence of religion into the essence of man (menschliche Wesen, human nature). But the essence of man is no abstraction inherent in each single individual. In reality, it is the ensemble of the social relations." Thereupon, instead of founding itself on the singular, concrete individual subject, as did classic philosophy, including contractualism (Hobbes, Locke and Rousseau) but also political economy, Marx began with the totality of social relations: labour, language and all which constitute our human existence. He claimed that individualism was an essence the result of commodity fetishism or alienation. Although some critics have claimed that meant that Marx enforced a strict social determinism which destroyed the possibility of free will, Marx's philosophy in no way can be reduced to such determinism, as his own personal trajectory makes clear.
In 1844-5, when Marx was starting to settle his account with Hegel and the Young Hegelians in his writings, he critiqued the Young Hegelians for limiting the horizon of their critique to religion and not taking up the critique of the state and civil society as paramount. Indeed in 1844, by the look of Marx's writings in that period (most famous of which is the "Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844", a text that most explicitly elaborated his theory of alienation), Marx's thinking could have taken at least three possible courses: the study of law, religion, and the state; the study of natural philosophy; and the study of political economy. He chose the last as the predominant focus of his studies for the rest of his life, largely on account of his previous experience as the editor of the newspaper Rheinische Zeitung on whose pages he fought for freedom of expression against Prussian censorship and made a rather idealist, legal defense for the Moselle peasants' customary right of collecting wood in the forest (this right was at the point of being criminalized and privatized by the state). It was Marx's inability to penetrate beneath the legal and polemical surface of the latter issue to its materialist, economic, and social roots that prompted him to critically study political economy.
Political economy predates the 20th century division of the two disciplines of politics and economics, treating social relations and economic relations as interwoven. Marx built on and critiqued the most well-known political economists of his day, the British classical political economists.
From Adam Smith came the idea that the grounds of property is labour.
Marx critiqued Smith and Ricardo for not realizing that their economic concepts reflected specifically capitalist institutions, not innate natural properties of human society, and could not be applied unchanged to all societies. He proposed a systematic correlation between labour-values and money prices. He claimed that the source of profits under capitalism is value added by workers not paid out in wages. This mechanism operated through the distinction between "labour power", which workers freely exchanged for their wages, and "labour", over which asset-holding capitalists thereby gained control.
This practical and theoretical distinction was Marx's primary insight, and allowed him to develop the concept of "surplus value", which distinguished his works from that of Adam Smith and David Ricardo. Workers create enough value during a short period of the working day to pay their wages for that day (necessary labour); however, they continue to work for several more hours and continue to create value (surplus labour). This value is not returned to them but appropriated by the capitalists. Thus, it is not the capitalist ruling class that creates wealth, but the workers, the capitalists then appropriating this wealth to themselves. (Some of Marx's insights were seen in a rudimentary form by the "Ricardian socialist" school .) He developed this theory of exploitation in Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, a "dialectical" investigation into the forms value relations take.
Marx's theory of business cycles; of economic growth and development, especially in two sector models; and of the declining rate of profit, or crisis theory, are other important elements of Marx's political economy. Marx later made tentative movements towards econometric investigations of his ideas, but the necessary statistical techniques of national accounting only emerged in the following century. In any case, it has proved difficult to adapt Marx's economic concepts, which refer to social relations, to measurable aggregated stocks and flows. In recent decades, however, a loose "quantitative" school of Marxist economists has emerged. While it may be impossible to find exact measures of Marx's variables from price data, approximations of basic trends are possible.
Rousseau was one of the first modern writers to seriously attack the institution of private property, and therefore is sometimes considered a forebear of modern socialism and communism, though Marx rarely mentions Rousseau in his writings. He argued that the goal of government should be to secure freedom, equality, and justice for all within the state, regardless of the will of the majority. From Jean-Jacques Rousseau came the idea of egalitarian democracy.
In 1833 France was experiencing a number of social problems arising out of the Industrial Revolution. A number of sweeping plans of reform were developed by thinkers on the left. Among the more grandiose were the plans of Charles Fourier and the followers of Saint-Simon. Fourier wanted to replace modern cities with utopian communities, while the Saint-Simonians advocated directing the economy by manipulating credit. Although these programs didn’t have much support, they did expand the political and social imagination of their contemporaries, including Marx. 
Louis Blanc is perhaps best known for originating the social principle, later adopted by Marx, of how labor and income should be distributed: “From each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs.” 
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon participated in the February 1848 uprising and the composition of what he termed "the first republican proclamation" of the new republic. But he had misgivings about the new government because it was pursuing political reform at the expense of the socio-economic reform, which Proudhon considered basic. Proudhon published his own perspective for reform, Solution du probleme social, in which he laid out a program of mutual financial cooperation among workers. He believed this would transfer control of economic relations from capitalists and financiers to workers. It was Proudhon's book What is Property? that convinced the young Karl Marx that private property should be abolished.
In one of his first works, The Holy Family, Marx said, "Not only does Proudhon write in the interest of the proletarians, he is himself a proletarian, an ouvrier. His work is a scientific manifesto of the French proletariat." Marx, however, disagreed with Proudhon's anarchism and later published vicious criticisms of Proudhon. Marx wrote The Poverty of Philosophy as a refutation of Proudhon's The Philosophy of Poverty. In his socialism, Proudhon was followed by Mikhail Bakunin. After Bakunin's death, his libertarian socialism diverged into anarchist communism and collectivist anarchism, with notable proponents such as Peter Kropotkin and Joseph Déjacque.
Marx's revision of Hegelianism was also influenced by Engels' book, ‘’The Condition of the Working Class’’ in England in 1844, which led Marx to conceive of the historical dialectic in terms of class conflict and to see the modern working class as the most progressive force for revolution. Thereafter Engels and Marx worked together for the rest of Marx's life, so that the collected works of Marx and Engels are generally published together, almost as if the output of one person. Important publications, such as the German Ideology and the Communist Manifesto, were joint efforts. Engels says "I cannot deny that both before and during my 40 years’ collaboration with Marx I had a certain independent share in laying the foundation of the theory, and more particularly in its elaboration." But he adds Marx was influenced by Antique materialism, especially Epicurus (to whom Marx dedicated his thesis, ‘’Difference of natural philosophy between Democritus and Epicurus’’, 1841) for his materialism and theory of clinamen which opened up a realm of liberty.
Marx drew on Lewis H. Morgan and his social evolution theory. He wrote a collection of notebooks from his reading of Lewis Morgan but they are regarded as being quite obscure and only available in scholarly editions.
Giambattista Vico propounded a cyclical theory of history, according to which human societies progress through a series of stages from barbarism to civilization and then return to barbarism. In the first stage (called the Age of the Gods) religion, the family, and other basic institutions emerge; in the succeeding Age of Heroes, the common people are kept in subjection by a dominant class of nobles; in the final stage (the Age of Men) the people rebel and win equality, but in the process society begins to disintegrate. The connection between Vico's theory of history, and Marx's account of the evolution of society is apparent. 
Marx read Darwin's The Origin of Species and recognized its value in supporting his theory of class struggle. He even sent Darwin a personally inscribed copy of Das Kapital in 1873. Marx understood that Darwin's work both helped to explain the internal struggles of human society, and provided a material explanation for the processes of nature. 
In 1861, Karl Marx wrote to his friend Ferdinand Lassalle, "Darwin’s work is most important and suits my purposein that it provides a basis in natural science for the historical class struggle. ... Despite all shortcomings,it is here that, for the first time, ‘teleology’ in natural science is not only dealt a mortal blow but itsrational meaning is empirically explained."
Having read Darwin's work and mentioned Darwin by name in Das Kapital, it is presumable that Marx may have been influencedto some degree by Darwin.
However, the depth of the influence, if any, would certainly seem to be greatly exaggerated by a numberof religious fundamentalists who seek to paint Darwin's ideas as incredibly dangerous. There is nomention of Darwin or evolution in The Communist Manifesto -- not surprising, since Darwin's On the Origin of Species was published in 1859, 11 years later -- and the only reference to Darwin in Das Kapital amounts to short footnotes on technological specialization in manufacturing and industry.
Despite this, in The Disasters Darwinism Brought to Humanity, Harun Yahya (a Muslim creationist) writes: "Karl Marx, the founder of Communism, adapted Darwin's ideas, which deeply influenced him, to the dialectic process of history." Yahya also writes: "Marx revealed his sympathy for Darwin by dedicating his most important work, Das Kapital, to him." 
This last bit is a common misconception that arose from a letter from Darwin to Edward Aveling, (who later became the lover of Marx's daughter, Eleanor). Aveling had written to Darwin about wanting to dedicatehis book to him, but Darwin declined and Darwin's response became mixed with Karl Marx's papers when EleanorMarx inherited her father's papers from Engels. The letter was published in 1931 in the Russian Communistmagazine, Under the Banner of Marxism, which went on to suggest that the enclosures referred to in theletter might have been chapters from Das Kapital that dealt with evolution. It was not until 1975that Aveling's letter to Darwin was discovered, debunking this myth. 

John Andreas Widtsoe (, 31 January 1872 – 29 November 1952) was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) from 1921 until his death. Widtsoe was also a noted author, scientist, and academician.
Widtsoe was born on the island of Frøya in Sør-Trøndelag, Norway. At birth his hand was attached to the side of his head but he survived the operation to fix this problem. When Widtsoe was two his family moved to the Norwegian mainland city of Namsos. His father, also named John, died in February 1878. This left his mother Anna as a widow with two young sons to take care of: Widtsoe, who was then five, and his little brother Osborne Widtsoe. After this the family moved to Trondheim. Here his mother was introduced to the LDS Church by a shoemaker.
In 1883, Widtsoe immigrated to the United States with his mother and brother. They made it to Utah Territory in mid-November. Widtsoe was baptized a member of the LDS Church the following April.
Widtsoe graduated from Brigham Young College in Logan, Utah. He then attended Harvard University graduating with honors in 1894. He served as the head of the agricultural experiment station at Utah State Agricultural College. He married Leah Dunford, a granddaughter of Brigham Young. She held a degree in home economics and the two of them worked together in extension efforts. He taught farmers better farming skills and she taught their wives how to better utilize what they got from the farm. 
In 1898, he was ordained to the office of a seventy and set apart to do missionary work in connection with his studies in Europe. He entered the University of Göttingen, Germany, and after applying himself diligently to his studies he graduated from that institution, with the degrees of A. M. Ph.D. in 1899. For part of his time in Europe, Widtsoe lived in Switzerland. The police wanted proof that he and his wife were married, and since they had neglected to bring their wedding license they got married a second time.
In August 1900 Widtsoe became the director of the Agricultural Experiment Station at what is now Utah State University. While in this position he founded The Deseret Farmer with Lewis A. Merrill and J. Edward Taylor. Their goal was to have it be a popular magazine that would be read and implemented by the actual farmers. 
In 1905 Widtsoe was dismissed from the agricultural college as a result of political debates about its future and President William J. Kerr's feeling that Widtsoe was insufficiently supporting him.
For a short time he was a professor of agriculture at BYU, and is arguably the founding father of Brigham Young University's college of biology and agriculture. On BYU campus the John A. Widtsoe building is the home of the College of Biology and Agriculture. Soon, however, he returned to Logan to succeed Kerr as president of Utah State University from 1907 to 1916. He also served as the president of the University of Utah from 1916 until his call as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve in 1921. Widtsoe was the fifth Commissioner of Church Education from 1921 to 1924 and was the seventh commissioner from 1934 to 1936.
During his time as an apostle Widtsoe taught a religion class at the University of Southern California.
For two years in the 1920s Widtsoe lived in Washington, D. C. where he supervised the reorganization of the Federal Bureau of Reclamation.
Widtsoe was closely associated with the Improvement Era even before he became an apostle. Widtsoe was associate editor of the Era from 1935 until 1952. While editor of the Era, in the words of Parrish, Widtsoe "directed its growth from a magazine primarily for the youth to the voice of the whole Church". One of Widtsoe's employees while at the Improvement Era was Hugh Nibley, who he convinced to become a professor at Brigham Young University. 
Widtsoe was also part of the Genealogy committee of the church, being one of the main people behind the implementation of the Temple Index Bureau. 
In 1923 Widtsoe accompanied Reed Smoot on a journey to Great Britain and the Scandinavian countries, during which they secured recognition and opened the way for missionaries of the church to return to these lands.
From 1926 until 1932 he served as president of the European Mission. While in this office, Widtsoe convinced the First Presidency to call a separate president of the British Mission, so that the European Mission president could assume his duties as the supervisor of all the missions in Europe. While president of the European mission, Widtsoe dedicated Czechoslovakia for the preaching of the gospel, and worked closely with Arthur Gaeth in starting the mission there.
Widtsoe married Leah Dunford, a daughter of Susa Young Gates, who was a daughter of Brigham Young. Widtsoe worked closely with his wife and mother-in-law in their writing of a biography of Brigham Young. It is this relationship that caused Widtsoe to complete a book on the teachings of Brigham Young. John and Leah also wrote a book entitled "The Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation". This book advocates eating healthy food as part of the Word of Wisdom, although not as a required portion that should be lived in order to get a temple recommend. 
Besides the Teachings of Brigham Young, Widtsoe was also the lead compiler of Gospel doctrine: selections from the sermons and writings of Joseph F. Smith, sixth president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
Widtsoe also wrote A Rational Theology as Taught by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints which has been cited by later LDS authors such as J. Reuben Clark. Another book of Widtsoe's was Evidences and Reconciliations, which was actually a compilation of his Improvement Era writings, which were his answers to the questions on matters of faith he received most often. In this work Widtsoe admits that there are multiple interpretations that Latter-day Saints can hold on issues. One example is his explanation of the creation of the earth: He points out that faithful Latter-day Saints hold the six-day, six-thousand years and undefined-period interpretations of the creation. Although he gives by far the most space to the explanation of the unknown-period interpretation, he does not rigidly contest for any of these interpretations.
Widtsoe also wrote Priesthood and Church Welfare and Priesthood and Church Government, both published in 1939. His work The Message of the Doctrine and Covenants was published after his death, after having been edited by his son-in-law G. Homer Durham. Widtsoe wrote Seven Claims of the Book of Mormon: A Collection of Evidences with Franklin S. Harris, Jr.
Widtsoe wrote Joseph Smith: Seeker After Truth Prophet of God. It was published in 1951, and later reprinted by Bookcraft in 1957. It begins with an account of the first vision and goes all the way to Joseph Smith's martyrdom at Carthage. Another work by Widtsoe on Joseph Smith was Joseph Smith as a Scientist: A Contribution to Mormon Philosophy published by the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association in 1908. In 1944, his essay "The Divine Mission of Joseph Smith" was included in Handbook of the Restoration published by Zion's Printing and Publishing Company in Independence, Missouri. 
Widtsoe wrote two autobiographies. The first In the Gospel Net largely focused on his mother's conversion to the church. The second In a sunlit Land told the story of his later life, and also included explanations of his educational philosophy. 
Another book by Widtsoe was Dry-Farming: A System of Agriculture for Countries Under a Low Rainfall (New York: MacMillan Company, 1920). He also served as a co-author of Dodge's Geography of Utah.
He wrote numerous works, including a hymn "How Long, O Lord Most Holy and True" which appears as hymn #126 in the current LDS hymnal.
Widtsoe died in Salt Lake City, Utah of uremia; he also had prostate cancer for a number of years before his death.
Adam S. Bennion was called to the Quorum of the Twelve after Widtsoe's death.

John Edward Brownlee served as Attorney-General of Alberta from 1921 until 1926, in the United Farmers of Alberta (UFA) government of Herbert Greenfield. As Brownlee was the only lawyer in a caucus formed almost entirely of farmers, his role extended beyond the traditional expectations of an attorney-general, and ranged from providing legal advice to explaining how to write a business letter; he also became the government's de facto leader in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta.
UFA members held widely disparate political views, and Brownlee quickly became identified with the government's conservative faction. He opposed radical changes to the structure of government and urged thrift in public spending. As part of the government's attempts to balance its budget, Brownlee favoured selling its money-losing railways and concluding an agreement with the federal government to give Alberta control over its natural resources; he was unsuccessful at both. As a member of a farmers' government, he was also involved in attempts to alleviate drought-induced poverty in southern Alberta and in investigations into the establishment of a provincial wheat pool.
UFA Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) began to see Brownlee as a better leader than the indecisive Greenfield. A group of them attempted to force Greenfield to resign in Brownlee's favour. Though Brownlee opposed these attempts, initially threatening to resign if Greenfield did, he was eventually persuaded to accept the premiership if Greenfield willingly relinquished it. Brownlee became premier November 23, 1925.
Brownlee began his legal career in Calgary, and the UFA was one of his firm's major clients. One of the projects he undertook for it was the creation of the United Grain Growers (UGG), of whose securities division he became general manager in 1919. He also travelled around Alberta with UFA president Henry Wise Wood answering UFA members' legal questions while Wood spoke to them about politics and the farmers' movement. Though Brownlee was not initially interested in the UFA's political activities, this changed through his association with Wood and Progressive Party of Canada leader Thomas Crerar.
Until 1919, the UFA's political activities were limited to advocacy, but that year it decided to run candidates in the 1921 provincial election. Despite Brownlee's burgeoning interest in politics, he did not view himself as part of the UFA's political branch, and did not run as a candidate; indeed, he was on vacation in Victoria, British Columbia, for most of the campaign.
The UFA contested the election without a leader, so when it won 38 of the 61 seats in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta it did not know who it would recommend to form a government as Premier of Alberta. Wood was not interested and suggested that Brownlee should take the position, to the latter's astonishment. Brownlee did not believe that, as an urbanite and lawyer, he would be acceptable to the rural UFA caucus, and declined; the position went to Herbert Greenfield.
Though the UFA MLAs were not willing to accept a non-farmer as premier, many of them realized that the post of Attorney-General should go to a lawyer. Others were less convinced, and Brownlee was invited to address the UFA caucus. He acknowledged that there was no constitutional requirement on the question, but advised that a non-lawyer attorney-general would be wholly reliant on the advice of the lawyers on his staff. With the caucus convinced, Greenfield asked Brownlee to accept the position. Brownlee demurred, reluctant to take the resulting cut in income, not eager to leave his family in Calgary to work in Edmonton (the provincial capital), and leery of the high expectations invested in the new government by the province's farmers. Ultimately, a combination of duty, loyalty, and ambition convinced him to accept the position. Though the choice of cabinet ministers is traditionally the prerogative of the premier, as part of the UFA's agenda of democratic reform Greenfield agreed to present his choices to the caucus for vetting. Brownlee was approved August 11, 1921, and was sworn in two days later.
Neither he nor Greenfield had run as a candidate in the election, and neither was a member of the legislature. Percival Baker, the UFA member elected for Ponoka, had died on election day, opening up a seat for one of them. A second seat, Peace River, became available when incumbent Donald MacBeth Kennedy resigned to run in the 1921 federal election. Greenfield seemed a more reasonable candidate for that rugged northern riding than the urban lawyer Brownlee, and so Brownlee was acclaimed as Ponoka's MLA December 9, 1921.
 was the only lawyer in a government composed primarily of farmers, and the rest of the cabinet drew heavily on his expertise. Its reliance on him extended beyond legal issues to such matters as how to write a business letter. Greenfield was among the most dependent, and forwarded most controversial issues to his attorney-general for a draft response; Greenfield often signed the draft and send it out unchanged. The premier eventually relied on Brownlee so heavily that Brownlee set the agenda for cabinet meetings. The government also relied on Brownlee in the legislature, where it found itself under relentless attack from the John R. Boyle-led Liberals. Brownlee had the widest debating experience of the UFA members, and he was increasingly called upon to counter these attacks. His maiden speech was typical of him: "I came into this House with considerable trepidation, because I knew that sitting opposite would be the former giants of this House, men with ability, experience, and skill. Since coming in I've listened to all these men—giving their best—and now I blush at my own modesty."
When Greenfield was asked a difficult question in the legislature, he often leaned over to Brownlee, his seatmate, who supplied him with an answer in full view of the legislature. Many UFA members found this practice humiliating. Brownlee's importance to the government in the legislature was illustrated by an incident in 1922. Brownlee was on vacation in Victoria during a special sitting of the legislature. While his presence was usually considered crucial, the only item of business scheduled for the session was uncontroversial, and passed by a large margin. However, once this item was dispensed with, some members complained that the C$100 payment that they were to receive for the special session was too low. Greenfield brought a motion to double it; the amount was increased to $250 in committee. At a time when many farmers earned less than $250 per year, the move cost the UFA dearly in the eyes of its supporters. Many UFA MLAs privately suggested that the incident would have been avoided had Brownlee been present. On another occasion, in 1924, Brownlee was absent from the legislature due to illness. Boyle called him to assure him that he could rest easy, since the Liberals would not raise any difficult issues in his absence. While Brownlee appreciated the gesture, all involved recognized it as an admission that the government was helpless in the legislature without its strongman.
Brownlee's work as an MLA extended beyond the legislature. He gave close attention to correspondence from his constituents, especially those alleging improper treatment at Ponoka's psychiatric hospital. He prepared thoroughly for speaking engagements in his riding, trying to anticipate all possible questions. These measures were reflected in his support in the largely rural riding, where the Calgary lawyer became a popular and well-respected MLA.
Many of the elected UFA members espoused radical political doctrines calculated to transform the provincial government. Brownlee quickly became identified with the caucus's conservative faction. At the caucus meeting that approved his appointment, he put an end to discussion of whether nominations for justices of the peace should come from UFA locals or its central political committee by asserting that they would continue to be handled by the office of the Attorney-General. Later, many UFA MLAs argued that only motions explicitly declaring a lack of confidence in the government should be treated as motions of non-confidence. They were concerned that supporters of the government who nonetheless disagreed with it on a specific issue might be pressured to refrain from voting their consciences on motions, such as money bills, that were conventionally considered tests of the government's confidence. Brownlee warned these MLAs that regardless of their beliefs, the Lieutenant-Governor of Alberta was free to request the government's resignation any time he considered that it lacked or did not merit the legislature's confidence. Despite this warning, UFA MLAs John Russell Love and Alex Moore proposed a resolution in the legislature changing the convention. The proposal attracted notice from across Canada; R. B. Bennett advised Brownlee, his former clerk, to warn Moore and Love that it was unconstitutional and demand that they withdraw it. Brownlee was reluctant to do so, since a similar proposal had been part of the UFA's election platform, and instead moved successful amendments weakening the motion to a vague "statement of intent".
Brownlee clashed again with the UFA's radical elements on the question of a provincial bank. The writings of C. H. Douglas advocating an economic system that he called social credit were attracting notice in Alberta, and his adherents included many UFA members. Led by George Bevington, they sponsored a resolution at the UFA convention in January 1923 calling for the creation of a government-owned bank. After Bevington's introduction, support for the resolution was running high; Brownlee cooled enthusiasm with a speech of his own warning delegates that Alberta's debt load could not manage the programs that Bevington proposed that a provincial bank should undertake. Even so, the convention passed a resolution calling on the provincial government to apply for a bank charter from the federal government, which was responsible for banking under the British North America Act, 1867. At Brownlee's recommendation, the Greenfield government struck a commission under the leadership of University of Alberta economist D. A. MacGibbon, which strongly recommended against the establishment of a provincial bank. This mirrored Brownlee's own conclusion, reached after investigating state-run banks in New Zealand and New South Wales. At the 1924 UFA convention, Bevington and his followers reaffirmed their demands; Brownlee responded by pointing to the findings of the MacGibbon commission and to his contention that the proposal was unconstitutional and would bankrupt the province. In this he was supported by Henry Wise Wood, whom Bevington was challenging for the UFA presidency. Brownlee proposed instead that the government's treasury branches should begin to accept deposits.
Brownlee also advocated a conservative approach on budgetary issues. The UFA government inherited a large budget deficit, and Brownlee was dissatisfied with Greenfield's early efforts at reducing it. In 1922, he warned the premier that unless the government sharply cut expenditures, he would find it difficult to defend its fiscal policy in that year's session of the legislature. In 1924, unsatisfied with Greenfield's response, he made an example of his own department, cutting staff and taking a strict approach to spending. In 1923, he found an ally for his position in new provincial treasurer Richard Gavin Reid, who impressed on his cabinet colleagues the need for thrift and recommended the creation of a purchasing department for coordinating government expenditures.
The province's poor financial situation was due in part to its $5 million annual expenditure on railways, comprising 37 percent of the 1922 budget. These expenditures resulted from the collapse of four small-railroad syndicates, which left the government to finance the rail construction. Brownlee believed that these lines, the largest of which was the Edmonton, Dunvegan and British Columbia (ED&BC) line, should be sold to either the Canadian National Railway or the Canadian Pacific Railway. Though neither was interested in purchasing the lines, in 1925 both expressed an interest in leasing the ED&BC. However, the Royal Bank of Canada, which held the mortgage on the ED&BC, refused to consent to any lease arrangement unless the Alberta government redeemed its stock in the railway as security for the mortgage. Brownlee was inclined to agree with Minister of Railways Vernor Smith that the government should buy the mortgage from the Royal Bank and become the owner and operator of the line, but Greenfield was resistant to this approach and resolution of the railways question had to wait until Brownlee was premier.
Brownlee was also active on natural resource issues. Alberta, along with Saskatchewan and Manitoba, had been admitted into Confederation without being granted the control over its natural resources that the older provinces enjoyed over theirs. While the federal government did provide a compensatory grant in lieu of resource rights, Alberta sought control over the resources not only because it believed that this would yield higher revenues than the grant, but out of sheer pride. In 1920, Prime Minister Arthur Meighen committed the federal government in principle to transferring resource rights; all that remained to discuss were the terms. Alberta, while willing to forgo the annual subsidy, wanted compensation for some of the land and resources previously awarded by the federal government to private interests, including of land granted to eastern railway companies, mineral leases that deprived the government of royalties for more than half of the of coal extracted from Alberta annually, and assorted areas with hydroelectric potential that had been yielded to private companies.
 became the province's chief negotiator on resource questions in October 1921. Though early attempts at reaching agreement were hampered by the unwillingness of the Maritime provinces to agree to the necessary constitutional amendments unless their own annual subsidies were increased, negotiations between the provincial and federal government continued intermittently throughout the 1920s. Liberal Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King occasionally appeared receptive to Alberta's demands, but never fully agreed to them. A possible explanation for this is found in a 1924 letter from Alberta Liberal Party leader John R. Boyle to King, explaining that the UFA was likely to lose the next provincial election to Boyle's Liberals "unless something extraordinary happens. That extraordinary thing which Greenfield wants to happen now is obtaining from you the natural resources at once." Despite this letter, the sides seemed close to agreement in early 1925: at a January conference Alberta accepted in principle a federal offer of three years of continuing subsidy after the transfer of resource rights. After an exhaustive series of meetings between Brownlee and the federal counsel, the agreement went back to the governments for approval. As Greenfield and Brownlee expressed their impatience with federal inaction, an intergovernmental meeting was convened in May. The meeting proceeded at a leisurely pace into June, after which King announced that his cabinet would like the summer to consider the agreement in greater detail. The Albertans returned home in disgust.
The consequences of continued control of Alberta's resources by the federal government extended beyond the merely financial. As Alberta's smaller towns and rural areas were being connected to the electrical grid, Calgary Power made an application to the federal government for hydroelectric rights on the upper Bow River. Not wanting these rights to fall into private hands, Brownlee made an application of his own on behalf of the Alberta government. It was denied by Charles Stewart, federal Minister of the Interior and the Premier of Alberta whom the UFA had defeated in 1921.
In 1924, the UFA government passed the Mineral Tax Act, which taxed mineral rightsholders at a rate of three cents per acre. The two largest such rightsholders, the Canadian Pacific Railway and the Hudson's Bay Company, urged the federal government to use its power of disallowance to put a stop to the legislation. When the federal government complied, Brownlee protested its action on three grounds: first, as a direct tax the proposed levy was within Alberta's rights under section 92 of the British North America Act, 1867, and it was constitutional convention for the federal government to exercise disallowance only when the impugned legislation was clearly unconstitutional. Second, disallowance allowed the province no recourse to the courts, where the constitutionality of the legislation could be tested. Third, the federal government's stated reasons for disallowing the legislation, which were released belatedly by justice minister Ernest Lapointe, were (according to Brownlee) erroneous and led Brownlee to suggest that Lapointe, a Québécois lawyer trained in the civil law tradition of his home province rather than the common law system used in the rest of Canada, must be unfamiliar with the land-holding system outside of Quebec. Brownlee's attacks were rejected, and the disallowance stood.
The UFA took office at a time of drought in the southern regions of the province. At Brownlee's instigation, the government appointed a three-person panel, led by Charles Alexander Magrath, to investigate the problem. In 1922 the government passed the Drought Relief Act. The Act, a Brownlee brainchild, created a Drought Relief Commissioner to whom farmers in affected areas could turn for financial counselling and asset administration. It authorized the adjustment of farmers' debts to levels that were within the debtors' means, but still sufficiently acceptable to creditors that their willingness to make loans would not disappear altogether. Brownlee hoped that this system would provide affected farmers with sound financial advice and facilitate the fair division of farmers' assets among competing creditors without forcing farmers to pay high legal fees. In 1923 this was replaced by the Debt Adjustment Act, which strengthened the commissioner's powers and was intended to extend his jurisdiction over the entire province; due to opposition from lenders, the portions of the act dealing with other than drought-stricken areas were never proclaimed.
 name change of the legislation reflected Brownlee's growing belief that farmers' financial troubles were due to factors more systemic than lack of rain. Angry over the federal government's decision to allow the first incarnation of the Canadian Wheat Board (CWB) to lapse, many Albertan farmers began to advocate the "pooling" of their wheat, which would render individual farmers less susceptible to the machinations of grain speculators by introducing collective marketing, with each farmer receiving an averaged, identical price. Farmers in Saskatchewan and Manitoba were more adamant about the return of the CWB; Prime Minister King eventually agreed to its re-creation, provided that at least two of Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba passed enabling legislation and found the personnel necessary to sit on the Board. By June 1923, the provinces had not found anybody suitable. Interest in pooling experienced a resurgence. In July, a UFA meeting, which Brownlee attended as the government's representative, endorsed the creation of a wheat pool as soon as practicable. Brownlee and his cabinet colleague Richard Gavin Reid undertook an investigation of how soon this might be, which included a trip to San Francisco to meet with Aaron Sapiro, an American agricultural cooperative leader. Sapiro proclaimed that a wheat pool could be organized in a few weeks, though both Brownlee and Reid disagreed and returned to Canada committed to caution. However, in their absence the Edmonton Journal and Calgary Herald had invited Sapiro to tour Alberta, and his speeches stirred up extravagant expectations among UFA members for immediate action, in time for the new organization to market the 1923 crop.
Faced with the zeal of its membership, the UFA leadership appointed a 17-person committee, including Brownlee, to create the Alberta Cooperative Wheat Producers Limited. The membership fee was to be three dollars, and the organization was to work with similar organizations in Saskatchewan and Manitoba. The provincial government—at Brownlee's insistence—and the UGG both provided startup loans. The UGG also took the lead in agreeing to let its grain elevators be used by the pool, which allowed Brownlee to defeat those committee members who thought the new company should acquire its own elevators.
By the end of August it was obvious that the organizations in Saskatchewan and Manitoba were not going to be ready in time for the 1923 crop, and the committee decided to proceed alone. It determined that if farmers representing half of Alberta's total wheat acreage agreed to pool their crop by September 15, the pool would proceed. Brownlee believed that this was an impossible objective. Despite the experimental and unproven nature of the model and the as-yet nonexistent organization that was to execute it, this objective was met. The Alberta Wheat Pool was born. By the following year's harvest, comparable organizations had formed in Saskatchewan and Manitoba, and a Central Selling Agency (CSA) was formed to sell all three provinces' wheat. The CSA's first president, Alexander James McPhail (whom Brownlee helped select), offered Brownlee the position of CSA general manager, at the attractive salary of $20,000 per year (a figure that Brownlee had helped set). At the urging of his government colleagues and the UFA leadership, both of who felt his continued presence in Edmonton was vital to the UFA government's hold on power, he declined; he was instead made the CSA's general counsel. Brownlee was also heavily involved in the creation of a livestock pool and three dairy pools, as a sort of "poolmania" hit Alberta farmers.
As Attorney-General, Brownlee inherited the prohibition implemented by the previous Liberal government. While the UFA base and public opinion both favoured prohibition, the existing law was full of loopholes and unevenly enforced. Some judges, opponents of prohibition, refused to convict defendants charged with liquor offences. The UFA had pledged during the election campaign to introduce prohibition in fact as well as in law, and the task fell to Brownlee. He initially cooled expectations by announcing that he had no interest in making "any hasty or ill-considered move", either in changing the law or altering enforcement the existing one.
 September 21, 1922, Constable Steve Lawson of the Alberta Provincial Police was murdered at his Blairmore home by bootlegger Emil Picariello and his companion Florence Lassandra. He was the third policeman killed in Alberta in liquor-related incidents in 1922. The murder opened up a rift between Albertans of British descent, who saw bootlegging as an affront to the rule of law even if they did not support prohibition, and Albertans of southern and eastern European descent, who found prohibition to be something of a joke and accepted bootlegging. Brownlee authorized the deployment of special constables to apprehend Picariello and Lassandra. Once they were arrested, he appeared personally at the prosecution's bench alongside A. A. McGillivray, reputedly Alberta's best courtroom lawyer, whose services he secured specifically for the case. Picariello and Lassandra were convicted and sentenced to death by hanging.
By the time of their executions in May 1923, public opinion was turning against prohibition. The sentiment that criminal activities such as Picariello's were the inevitable result of prohibition laws became a popular one, as did the view that the government should legalize and regulate liquor sales. Brownlee, morally supportive of prohibition, began to personally support this course, believing that prohibition was unenforceable in the face of widespread public opposition. A 1923 referendum opted for the end of prohibition. In 1924 Brownlee guided the Government Liquor Control Act—drafted with the assistance of R. B. Bennett, who received $1,000 for his services—through the legislature.
As Attorney-General, Brownlee was responsible for administration of the Lord's Day Act, which forbade most commerce on Sundays. Charles Huestis of the Lord's Day Alliance took issue with the Edmonton Orchestra's Sunday concerts, on the grounds that by opening them only to its subscription holders it was de facto charging admission, and that by paying its musicians honoraria it was gainfully employing them in their regular professions on Sundays. Brownlee declined to prosecute, since courts had previously held that the concerts were legal. Huestis retorted that as Attorney-General Brownlee should make them illegal, to which Brownlee responded that he fully appreciated the importance of the Sabbath and did not need to be lectured on the subject by Huestis. There were also complaints about farmers violating the act by working Sundays; Brownlee felt that such complaints were often more about conflicts between neighbours than preservation of the Sabbath, and prosecuted only the most gratuitous and flagrant cases.
In the 1921 federal election, 65 of the Canadian House of Commons' 235 seats were won by Progressives and allied factions, including the UFA, which won both seats it contested. Liberal Prime Minister-designate William Lyon MacKenzie King had only a minority, and expected to rely on the support of these Progressives to govern. Progressive leader Thomas Crerar envisioned forming a coalition government with the Liberals, and knew that he would be expected to provide cabinet members from Alberta, which had been swept by Progressives and allied parties. Seeing no "cabinet material" among the elected members, he sent an emissary to Edmonton to convince Greenfield or Brownlee to enter federal politics. Brownlee refused and advised Greenfield to do the same, on the grounds that their abandonment of provincial politics soon after the UFA's election would be seen as a betrayal.
As Greenfield's shortcomings became obvious, Brownlee found himself fielding propositions closer to home: in 1924 a group of UFA MLAs dissatisfied with Greenfield—including George Johnston, George MacLachlan, William Shield, Donald Cameron, Oran McPherson, and Austin Claypool—approached Brownlee to advise him that they planned to ask the premier to resign in favour of his attorney-general. To their surprise, Brownlee immediately told them that if Greenfield resigned, so would he. Faced with Brownlee's refusal to cooperate with their coup, the dissidents relented. They made another attempt in 1925; Brownlee again threatened to resign, but this time was persuaded by Henry Wise Wood to accept the crown if Greenfield relinquished it willingly. Greenfield assured Brownlee that he had not wanted the job of premier in the first place and would happily see Brownlee take it from him. Faced with these assurances, Brownlee agreed to form a government, and became Premier of Alberta November 23, 1925. He remained Attorney-General until after the 1926 election, when he appointed the newly-elected John Lymburn to replace him.
KFAC was a commercial classical music radio station in Los Angeles, broadcasting for most of its life on 1330 kHz AM, and subsequently in both simulcast and separate programming on 92.3 MHz FM as well. "Only 41 of nearly 9,000 commercial radio stations in the United States play classical music" and KFAC was considered one of the best . On September 20, 1989 at 2 p.m., new owners changed both its name and its format, depriving Southern California of a major cultural institution. During its heyday, the station was arguably the most important cultural organization in the Los Angeles area, having greater influence on lovers of classical music than even the Los Angeles Philharmonic. Announcers such as Howard Rhines, Dick Crawford, Thomas Cassidy, Carl Princi, Fred Crane, Steve Allen, Alfred Leonard, Tom Dixon, Bill Carlson, Dick Joy, Tom Franklin, Ed Stoddard, Bernie Alan, Rodger Layng, Steve Markham and Doug Ordunio were featured on the station. For several years, the station also carried the daily syndicated Adventures in Good Music with Karl Haas. Other regularly scheduled programs were hosted by Leonora Schildkraut, Werner Klemperer, and Gussie Moran. 
Many of its programs, such as "The Gas Company Evening Concert," "Luncheon at the Music Center," and "The World of Opera" lasted for decades – with the Gas Company show airing for over 40 years. The station's "DJs" also had unusual career longevity; according to some estimates, their collective tenure at the station was over 400 years. This unique staying power, and the fact that at times KFAC was the only classical musical station in Los Angeles (KUSC, its last competitor, did not convert to full time classical music broadcasting until 1976, and despite being non-commercial never achieved the listenership of the professionally formatted KFAC) meant that several generations of Angelenos grew up listening to the station. That, along with its cultural authority, gave the station a special place in their affections.
Like most radio stations in the 1940s, KFAC did not fill one niche, but rather broadcast a wide variety of programming, including baseball games from the Pacific Coast League. Its evolution into the all classical-music format was a slow process over many years. Its first classical music show began in December 1943, when Thomas Cassidy began hosting a two-hour nightly program sponsored by the Southern California Gas Company. Eventually the station added a second show, "Musical Masterpieces". It was Cassidy's responsibility to build the musical library for these shows.
In 1945, the station's owner, E.L. Cord (the F.A.C. in the station's call letters stood for "Fuller Auburn Cord", the Auburn Cord & Duesenberg dealer in the Los Angeles area, and western region headquarters for the Auburn Automobile Co. The transmitter was located on the roof of the building), was touring the station when he saw for the first time the huge collection of discs (a full symphony might take up twelve 78 rpm discs) KFAC owned. Cord decided to make better use of this investment by switching to all-classical music. Management tested the waters on this idea by asking the audience if they wanted another nighttime program, "Lucky Lager Dance Time" (which played pop and swing tunes) to continue or if they would prefer more classical. Classical won by a slim margin.
Tom Dixon hosted the afternoon shift. His frequent errors (from mispronouncing the names of conductors and performers to playing movements of concertos and symphonies in the wrong order), prompted listener Sarah Lee Halpern to write to Dixon suggesting he name his show "Music and Mistakes With Tom Dixon." For a long time afterwards, every time Dixon made an error, he would say, "I'm sorry, Sarah Lee…" Dixon's less-formal atmosphere and willingness to admit his errors on the air endeared him to audiences. (Another listener once asked Dixon, "Who writes your mistakes?") For years Dixon signed off with the phrase "TTFN" (ta ta for now). Dick Crawford on the weekends was famous for playing opera records out of order and once played Bach's Brandenburg Concerto at the wrong speed.
From 1952 – 1973 KFAC broadcast performances from the Hollywood Bowl. The station pioneered an early form of stereo broadcast by having two microphones on different sides of the Bowl. Listeners at home who had two radios were instructed to place them seven to twelve feet apart and tune one to the 92.3 FM band and the other to KFAC's AM frequency, 1330. This method of producing stereo came to an end with the advent of FM multiplexing. 
Bowl broadcasts featured an intermission program and interview hosted by Thomas Cassidy. On non-broadcast nights, Cassidy appeared onstage at intermission to welcome the audience to the venue. Ultimately he was christened "The Voice of the Hollywood Bowl." However, Ernest Fleishmann, who had been hired as executive director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic, upon assuming management of the Hollywood Bowl, terminated Cassidy's appearances.
From 1953 to 1986 Carl Princi hosted "The World of Opera." Heard weekdays at 3 p.m., this hour-long program played selections from a wide variety of operas, both famous and obscure. Another well-known program was "Continental Varieties" which played every weekday afternoon at 3 PM with distinctive theme music by the English light music composer Eric Coates.
The Los Angeles Music Center, a three-theatre complex, opened in 1964. "Luncheon at the Music Center" was created in the early 1960s by Thomas Cassidy, who also hosted the program for its first eleven years. The progam was considered by many the pre-eminent talk show on which to plug theatrical and musical events in the Southern California area. Broadcast weekdays live from the then Pavilion Restaurant of the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion of the Music Center (with recorded shows only on holidays), the show interviewed not only musicians but also actors and directors who were either involved in local productions or just visiting the area. The guests actually did eat lunch during the show – during musical interludes – though the host did not. Nonetheless, the presence of other diners at the restaurant gave the show one of its hallmark elements: the sounds of plates and cutlery clacking in the background. Originally the program was broadcast using one microphone in the middle of the table. Eventually that was increased to three, which decreased the need for everyone talking to lean so far forward. Martin Workman succeeded Thomas Cassidy and hosted the show for 14 years.
During the latter years of the station, KFAC made various attempts to appeal to a younger audience. Most of these attempts were brought about by some of the youngest staff members Dennis Parnell and Doug Ordunio.
One of the most unusual programs of all was the institution of “Global Village” which was heard from 1974 until 1986. It was conceived by then FM Programmer Dennis Parnell, who was also a professional singer and voice teacher in the Los Angeles area. The basic idea of the show was to extend the concept of style so that ALL types of music would be considered appropriate. One of the most unusual juxtapositions attempted by Parnell during these early stages was to combine an obscure wordless choral composition by Sergei Rachmaninoff with Janis Joplin’s recording of the song Mercedes Benz. This was considered rather shocking to some of the station’s dyed-in-the-wool listeners, however, it did serve to attract a number of younger listeners as well as older listeners with open minds who were interested in hearing new ideas. The station had often been criticized as a dinosaur and the announcing style was viewed as stodgy. Its opening tagline, spoken each week by host Carl Princi was “Welcome to Global Village, a meeting place for the I and the ear.”
After several months on the air, Parnell decided that he should receive additional monies in order to continue the production of the show, since the show was rather time-consuming to prepare. He proceeded to tell program director Carl Princi that he would stop production of the show if his demands were not met. Princi then had a meeting with then library employee Doug Ordunio. Princi asked Ordunio if it would be possible for him to continue production of “Global Village” if Parnell made good on his threat to end the program. He agreed to continue since he also possessed a vast musical knowledge, regardless of style. This move effectively ended the friendship between Parnell and Ordunio. Parnell left the station around April 1974. Ordunio was installed as the new FM Programmer, a job he continued until Dec. 31, 1986.
Under Ordunio’s direction, “Global Village” ascended to greater heights and created more unusual sounds and experiments of music, such as the night a slow movement from a Mahler symphony and a Bruckner symphony were heard simultaneously.
Ordunio was responsible for creating other provocative classical music programs, such as “At Home With” which featured interviews recorded at the homes of classical musical celebrities who lived in Southern California. He also produced five 4-hour specials collectively known as “The Circular Path”, which expounded the idea that all music was bounded by a series of concepts and forms which would eventually repeat themselves. The program began with the sound of the aortic pulse recorded within a mother’s uterus (the first sound ostensibly heard by a fetus), and then took listeners through the history of music with compositions as well as interviews with prominent musical figures. The final show was four hours of conjectures about the future of classical music. The most unusual idea set forth was stated by composer Henry Brant who said that we would someday find ourselves in a world of “music pollution.” The entire program ended with a live recording of singer Peter Allen performing “Everything Old Is New Again,” which was basically the philosophy behind the entire 20-hour program.
The last show created by Ordunio before the station’s decline was “Making Waves,” a program of new age music, airing during a period before the creation of such stations as “The Wave.” At the time the program was instituted on Friday nights at 11:00 pm, the only broadcast vehicle for this music was a show known as “Midnight Café” on KNX-FM.
This program and “Global Village” were abandoned by Robert Goldfarb (program director under Louise Heifetz) because they were deemed inappropriate for the station’s image.
These recollections are by former announcer Doug Ordunio.
One of the funniest moments on Luncheon at the Music Center occurred during the tenure of host Thomas Cassidy. Since the program was run live and without tape delay, the guests needed to be on their best behavior. Cassidy was a strict Roman Catholic. One day when composer/conductor Lukas Foss was a guest on the show, he suddenly spouted out this uncensored remark. “There is always that wonderful story told about Beethoven who wrote a letter to a music critic, saying ‘What I shit is better than what you write.’” Cassidy was stuck because nothing could prevent the offending word from being broadcast.
After Martin Workman took over the program, another wonderful occasion was his interview of the guests who were in the current LA production of A Chorus Line. For music, Workman needed to play the Original Broadway Cast recording. However, he didn’t audition the recording for lyrical content, and so all the songs with bad lyrics (from the T and A song on down) went right over the air, much to the consternation of Workman.
Thomas Cassidy was like a ghost. One never saw him in the halls of the station. He would arrive in the middle of the night, record and leave the LPs for the next week’s shows and disappear back to the SF Valley. He always prided himself on his consistent professional deportment on the air. One night I decided to tune in the Gas Company program as I was driving in my car. the familiar Tchaikovsky theme was heard. Cassidy usually said, “Good evening, friends. This is Thomas Cassidy…” However, this time we heard “Good evening, friends…What the hell’s going on here?” Then I heard the volume turned down on the voice track. When the engineer Susan Rouzer deemed it was OK to proceed, she warily turned the track back up. Cassidy’s final word before the first front announcement were: “You get a lot more than gas, from The Gas Company.” I immediately pulled over and phoned the station, telling Susan, “Don’t let that voice track out of your sight. That is a keeper! Put it on my desk after the show.”
Tom Franklin, (called “the dean of Southern California business news reporters”) who hosted Executive Report on KFAC AM-FM for many years was the best man for the job. He was often gone on sponsored press junkets around the world, and he spoke with many top people at corporations everywhere. His show was the source of many intentional as well as unintentional bits of humor. 
He was also a notorious tippler, and it was noted that he was probably one of the few people who fell down the stairs in the posh Wilshire Blvd. restaurant Perino’s without spilling a drop of his gin and tonic. His reputation was shared with Doug Ordunio and engineer Richard Nielsen (who worked the morning shift). For several years the trio kept a collection of all the empty liquor bottles whose contents they had consumed on the station premises. These were place on top of the record shelves in a location that could not be seen by the general public. When they were finally discarded after several years, they filled a LARGE trash can.
One of the funniest intentional moments on the show was when Franklin interviewed the owner of the Dutch liqueur company, known in that country as Wyn and Fokking. Tom got the executive to explain the company’s transition to the US market, and the owners were warned that they needed to change the name due to the similarity of one of its names to an obscene word in English. Their solution was to change the name to “Bols” (which when spoken by the Netherlander seemed very similar to the English slang word for “testicles”).
Franklin was also known for breaking into laughter on the air, so uncontrollably that it would take him minutes to recover. This happened quite a number of times, so much so that in the Master Control room, a tape was kept which was labeled “The Tom Franklin Memorial Reel.” The story he loved to tell was one from his earlier days, when in the middle of a longer scripted segment, he heard a click on the desktop next to him. When he glanced up to see what it was, some person had placed a tall drink glass partially filled with water and a handful of Alka Seltzer tablets. A condom had been stretched over the top and as the tablets fizzed away, the condom rose to an erect position. Franklin lost it again…
One of the funniest things in which almost the entire staff participated was a video project that was created as a parting gift to the station manager George Fritzinger and his exceptional German secretary, Regina Sears. It was a station tour, conducted by the longtime KFWB news announcer Dan Evey (who was married to a member of the station’s sales department, Michelle Davis). 
The search, which visited all areas of the station, was to find the office of salesman Courtney Thompson (which was actually placed far into the recesses of the record library) near the offices of music director Clyde Allen, FM Programmer Doug Ordunio, and assistant programmer Steven de Mena.
All of the staff participated and along the wayward path, gave their farewells to George and Regina. Obviously, the staff members who had the greatest senses of humor provided some of the funniest moments on the tape. Perhaps the most audacious segment came near the end when the camera visited the FM studio, where Doug Ordunio was (apparently, but not actually) on the air. He was seated behind the mike and before he was about to talk on the air, he arranged some mysterious white powder (actually powdered sugar) on top of a large square mirror, and with a straw, pretended to snort cocaine.
After doing this, he seemed to open the mike and begin cursing wildly, as he announced a piece of music. The white powder was covering his nose. When this tape was shown at a reunion of the staff given at Sportsmen’s Lodge on Ventura Blvd, this spot provided one of the biggest laughs of the evening.
The tape concluded with the actual homeless man who often reclined beneath one of the shade trees outside the station with his dog, waving and saying his goodbye to George and Regina. Those two left before the notorious firing of New Years 1986. (Actually as salesman Courtney Thompson left the station after having been let go, he said to the library staff who were in their offices, "Watch out! There's blood spurting everywhere!")
One of Doug Ordunio's favorite tag lines for a station ID was: "KFAC-FM, Los Angeles--the bastion of sanity for Southern California."
Cleveland Broadcasting purchased KFAC from the Cord estate, and was itself purchased after a successful campaign by Atlantic States Industries (ASI), a subsidiary of the McGavrin-Guild "rep" company. Under ASI, KFAC ended its ban on commercial "jingles." Previous policy had been that all commercials had to be voiced by KFAC announcers. While music beds, usually classical, were OK, ad agency jingles were anathema. ASI also instituted the combo operation of broadcast consoles, so that KFAC announcers finally became radio DJs. Previously, engineers had spun the records and announcers had merely announced, either live or on tape. When time came for Federal Communications Commission (FCC) license renewal, a group of challengers also applied for the license, claiming that KFAC was not serving the local African-American community. This seemed a ludicrous charge because the station never discriminated against any group in its choice of featured composers or performers.
Investigations seemed to uncover that the protesting group had challenged other station licenses for the purposes of extorting substantial amounts of money from the station owners. It is not known precisely how much money was paid by the owners of KFAC to settle a possible lawsuit, but typically when a station’s license is being contested during the renewal process, there is a slim chance of it being sold. 
In 1986 a group of investors headed by Louise Heifetz (daughter-in-law of the violin virtuoso Jascha Heifetz) purchased the station for around $33 million. She and her accomplice (program director Robert Goldfarb) fired most of the staff announcers in the hope that new talent would attract new listeners. The highly respected engineering staff was also laid off in the new years blood bath of 1987. Supposedly, Goldfarb had been hired to do the same for manager Wallace Smith at KUSC a few years before.
During the next three years the station's ratings declined and it was sold to Evergreen Media, who changed its format and recast it as KKBT-FM "(The Beat", which eventually moved to 100.3 FM), an R&B station. Several years ago, Ralph Guild, the top man in charge of the company that owned KFAC confided that putting the station up for sale was one of the biggest mistakes he ever made.
In 1989, the new owners donated both the KFAC call sign and the classical record library to University of Southern California Radio station KUSC, which assigned the call sign to its Santa Barbara satellite.
Today the 92.3 frequency is home to HOT 92.3 Old School and R&B. The KFAC call letters, at home on the Santa Barbara translator for KUSC for over a decade, were replaced when the station chose to have all of its affiliates have call letters ending with "SC."

Karsa Orlong is a fictional character in Steven Erikson's fantasy series Malazan Book of the Fallen. He makes his first appearance in the novel Deadhouse Gates as Toblakai, bodyguard to Sha'ik. His past is revealed in the subsequent novel House of Chains.
Karsa Orlong is a Teblor warrior, of the Uryd tribe. His grandfather, Pahlk Orlong, was a famed warrior who had, centuries before, gone into the lowlands from the Laederon Plateau and slew many "children", as the Teblor call lowlanders. Karsa grew up on these stories, and believed that was how a true Teblor warrior was to behave. Karsa's father, Synyg, did not approve of this mindset, for he knew Pahlk's exploits to be lies and twistings of the truth. However, no one else knew this, and so Karsa organized a raid in honor of both his grandfather and his god, Urugal the Woven. As Warleader of his group, he and his comrades, Bairoth Gild and Delum Thord, raided through Sunyd and Rathyd lands to finally arrive at the same place where Pahlk had his escapades. Along the way, his group encountered and freed the Forkrul Assail known as Calm. Calm attacked Karsa, seeing the influence of the Teblor gods on him, but Karsa was barely injured, as Delum Thord defended him and received severe brain damage in the attempt, becoming reduced to a child-like state.
Upon reaching the lowlands, Karsa and his party found a small, fortified town instead of the farm his grandfather had raided. During the attack on this town, Delum Thord was killed and Bairoth Gild and Karsa were both captured. Bairoth was slain and Karsa was soon after sold into slavery, and lost his faith in his gods. After weeks of being chained to a wagon bed for transport to the sea, Karsa and his companion, Torvald Nom, found freedom in the fragment of Kurald Emurlahn known as the Nascent. During their time in this realm, Karsa and Torvald boarded the Silanda, and slew the Tiste Edur on board. They met up with other survivors from the slaving ship that had been wrecked in the Nascent, and returned to the normal world with them, arriving just off the shore of Seven Cities, near Ehrlitan. Karsa and Torvald Nom left the slavers behind on the shore, and encountered the supposedly-dead Napan Urko, who called himself Keeper and dabbled in archaeology. They left for Ehrlitan and were soon re-enslaved by the very same slaver, Silgar.
The group was captured by Malazan forces after arrival in Ehrlitan, Silgar claiming Karsa as a slave he had recaptured. Both Silgar and Karsa were imprisoned, and Karsa wound up with a tattoo on his face marking him as an escaped slave. Karsa and his cellmate later escaped, and fled into the Pan'potsun Odhan, whereupon Karsa was told of his true racial identity as a Thelomen Toblakai, from whom the Teblor people were descended. Karsa, known from this point on as Toblakai, goes with his cellmate, Leoman of the Flails, into the Holy Desert Raraku and becomes the loyal bodguard to Sha'ik.
Eventually, Karsa Orlong leaves the Holy Desert Raraku. Having been persuaded to go in search of a Jhag horse, he proceeds west into the Jhag Odhan. This move was also one his false gods desired. Along his journey, he encounters and fights Icarium, the Jhag known as the Slayer of the Ten Thousand, and Karsa's ironwood sword is destroyed. Neither Icarium nor Karsa is slain, as both are knocked unconscious in the clash.
Shortly thereafter, Karsa Orlong finally meets his gods in the Jhag Odhan, who prove to be T'lan Imass who were shattered in battle millennia earlier. They reveal to him that he was not just their pawn in their plans to regain physical form, but Karsa had also been made the Knight of Chains. In a Tellann-infused sacred cavern, the seven Unbound T'lan Imass help Karsa Orlong create an unbreakable sword of stone, into which the souls of Delum Thord and Bairoth Gild go, infusing it with bloodthirst. Karsa, now rearmed and faced with manifestations he could attack, shrugged off the facade of doing as the Unbound told him, and drove six of them off, further destroying the seventh, 'Siballe the Unfound. On his way out, he encounters the Tiste Edur warrior Trull Sengar and his T'lan Imass companion, Onrack. Karsa was not in a mood to kill them, and so the pair luckily survived.
A short time later, Karsa meets a Jaghut and his sister, who help Karsa obtain the Jhag horse he had set out to collect in the first place. Karsa then turns around and rides back into the Holy Desert.
Upon arriving back in the Oasis at the time of the final battle in which the Army of the Apocalypse was crushed, Karsa proceeded to kill several members of the camp with whom he had issues, though he could not find all of his targets. While scouring the camp, Karsa encounters two of the Hounds of Darkness, known as Deragoth, who had returned to life, and butchers them with frightening ease. Tying the Hounds' heads to his horse, Karsa speeds off into the desert at dawn, telling the Malazan forces they are no longer his sworn enemy.
At this time, Karsa vows to return home and claim the army the Unbound T'lan Imass had set aside for him, using this force to raise his people from the level to which they had sunk. Karsa, then on his way back to his people, encounters a human woman (the witch Samar Dev) in the desert who happens to be dying of thirst. He helps her and notes in passing that the reason that she is dying is because the self-powered carriage she built broke down.
He travels with her to her village, where people are immediately suspicious of him. Samar Dev persuades them to leave him alone.
Learning of a castle into which people have disappeared, Karsa decides to find out what's inside. Here he finds a K'Chain Che'Malle (Nah'ruk) and kills it after a ferocious fight. However, the village inhabitants remain suspicious of him and Karsa decides to leave with Samar Dev.
After a long journey they meet a Tiste Edur fleet on a mission to collect champions for their Emperor, Rhulad Sengar, who is the King in Chains. The Toblakai decides to go quietly for two reasons: To prove his might against the seemingly unkillable Emperor, and also because he discovers that Icarium Lifestealer is to challenge the Emperor as well.
Arriving in Lether (the continent which the Edur have conquered), Karsa proves himself the strongest champion by beating all other challengers except Icarium, who doesn't duel. Though he meets the Jhag in the city, he doesn't fight him because he discovers that Icarium has Toblakai blood in his veins.
Finally Karsa meets Rhulad Sengar and manages to create a blood ritual that creates a portal that brings him into The Crippled God's realm. There he kills the Edur's spirit and refuses to take the cursed sword that made Rhulad immortal. He then leaves the realm thanks to a portal of fire that had suddenly appeared. 
In Toll the Hounds we learn that the portal has brought him to Genabackis, where he meets again with Samar Dev, together with the man known as Traveler with whom he starts a friendship. Travelling together, they arrive in Darujhistan where Karsa witnesses the clash between Anomander Rake and Traveller, who is in truth Dassem Ultor, which ends with the former's death.
Despite being deeply humbled by the duel, the Toblakai once again proves his might by stopping the newly awakened Hounds of Light from taking Rake's sword, Dragnipur, helped by the Knight of Death and, lastly, by the daughters he bore, by the rape of a mother and her daughter, that he committed when setting out on his original quest.
At the end of Toll the Hounds, Karsa decides to stay in the City also because the former Bridgeburner Picker has sent him a message from Hood telling him that he is needed to help kill a God.

Kyle Reese is the primary character in the first ''Terminator'' film, the posthumous father of John Connor, and the love of Sarah Connor. He is played by Michael Biehn in the first Terminator films, Jonathan Jackson in the television series, and played as a teenager by Anton Yelchin in ''Terminator Salvation''.
Kyle Reese (Sergeant, Tech-Com, EN38416), a soldier in the human resistance from the post-apocalyptic future of The Terminator, where most of humanity had already been wiped out in a deadly nuclear war on August 29th, 1997, sparked off by an artificial intelligence known as Skynet. The sentient computer system launched a genocidal war on the survivors.
Kyle Reese was born after the nuclear attacks. Although in some Terminator media (such as the Sarah Connor Chronicles) he was born before the attacks. He was later captured by Skynet forces as a child and to survive he was forced to work in one of Skynet's concentration camps, where others are sent to their deaths. His freedom comes when a resistance movement, led by John Connor, freed him and the others from Skynet. Afterwards, Reese served in the 132nd Infantry under Justin Perry from 2021 to 2027, before transferring to Tech-Com under John Connor, someone he comes to admire and (coincidentally) consider his closest friend. Eventually, the resistance rallies enough remaining human forces to launch a successful, final assault on Skynet's central complex.
The final assault eventually allows the human resistance to cripple Skynet, as Reese explains in The Terminator. In 2029, the resistance is able to smash through the last of Skynet's defense grids, allowing them to enter Skynet's main compound and destroy it. Skynet, however, has a final, unexpected option: using experimental time displacement equipment, Skynet sends one of its most feared machines, a T-800 series Terminator, back to pre-apocalypse Los Angeles, California on May 12, 1984, to assassinate the young Sarah Connor, known to have been the mother of resistance leader John Connor, and thus prevent the birth of Connor and the success of his future rebellion.
Realizing what Skynet is attempting to do, Connor sends a soldier to intercept the Terminator. Sergeant Kyle Reese volunteers. Once he had gone through, the time displacement equipment is destroyed, leaving only him and the Terminator in 1984. 
Arriving unarmed and not knowing what the Terminator looks like in its human disguise, Reese locates and follows Sarah Connor, shadowing her until the T-800 attempts to carry out its mission. He rescues her, warning her of the impending doom of the human race and of the future significance carried by her and her unborn son. Though initially hostile towards Reese, Sarah grows to trust and love him as he becomes the only thing between her and the Terminator. On the run from the Terminator, Reese and Sarah have sex, in which her son and future leader John Connor is conceived.
Having grown up in the future where the machines had all but wiped out the human race, Reese is both physically and mentally hardened. His body is scarred from action against the machines, including healed burns as a result of wounds sustained after destroying an enemy, as witnessed in a nightmare when he tries to sleep.
In a deleted scene, when he tries to stop Sarah from going to Cyberdyne Systems, he sees something he has never seen before, what the world looks like before the war in the future. He says he thinks of it as a dream, the trees and stream, the flowers, and Sarah, all beautiful. He bursts into tears, saying it hurts and he believes he does not belong there, and he was not meant to see any of this. He then agrees with Sarah that they should try to change the future.
Though hard and battle weary, Reese had a love for Sarah Connor, a woman whom he had never met and only knew through a photo. The affection Kyle Reese felt for Sarah was based on the legend that surrounded her and on the image of her from the photograph given to him by John Connor.
Reese's life, however, is cut short when both he and Sarah are forced to confront the Terminator. After a high speed chase where he is wounded by gunfire and thinking that they destroyed the Terminator in an explosion of a fuel truck, they are again chased by the now-metal endoskeleton inside an automated factory, later revealed to be owned by Cyberdyne Systems.
Kyle turns on various mechanical equipment as visual cover while the Terminator batters its way through the door. After Sarah accidentally turns on a machine, they are discovered by the Terminator. After reaching the stairs of a footwalk, Reese tells Sarah to run for cover while Kyle tries to beat the Terminator with a metal pipe.
The Terminator knocks Kyle to the deck of the footwalk, though dazed, Reese reaches for his last homemade pipe bomb, lights it, and wedges it in between the Terminator's pelvic strut and torso. The Terminator is blown apart, and Reese is killed. The Terminator, though blown in half and missing an arm, is not destroyed. A wounded Sarah is able to find enough courage and resolve to destroy it, crushing the machine inside a mechanical press. While being taken away by paramedics soon afterward, Sarah tearfully watches as Reese's dead body is zipped up in a body bag and taken away. 
Sarah stops at a gas station in the deserts of Mexico six months later, already well into her pregnancy, and is debating to herself whether or not she should ever tell John who his father is. Eventually, she decides that she will, reflecting that Kyle deserves to be remembered for his sacrifice and contribution. Although Kyle Reese died not knowing that he was John Connor's father, John himself would know. Just then a young Mexican boy takes Sarah's picture with a Kodamatic camera, and gives the developed photo to her; it is the same photo Connor eventually gives to Reese. 
In Terminator 2: Judgement Day, Michael Biehn reprised the role of Kyle Reese; Sarah Connor, under heavy sedation, imagines him visiting her in a mental institution. Unchanged from his appearance in the first film, he embraces her and implores her to go to their son's aid, reminding her that "the future is not set." In this dream scene, Kyle is aware of the fact that he is John's father, despite the fact he didn't know of it in real life. This scene was removed for the original theatrical release, but restored to the extended editions released.
In the television show, Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles, he is born in 2002 before the events of Judgment Day in this altered timeline.
In the episode "Queen's Gambit", it is revealed that Kyle had an older brother named Derek (Brian Austin Green) who was also a resistance Soldier.
Actor Jonathan Jackson portrayed Kyle Reese in the episode of the first season "Dungeons & Dragons", which detailed of the last days of what happened of how he and his brother are separated during a recon mission before he made his trip through time to protect Sarah Connor, and later on the episode of the second season "Goodbye To All That", during Derek's recollection of the future war.
He is also played by Skyler Gisondo as an eight-year old version of the character in the beginning of the episode of "What He Beheld." In the final episode of the first season "What He Beheld", Derek Reese takes a now 16-years-old John Connor out for ice cream, as it is his birthday. As they are watching two boys play baseball, the younger boy drops the ball and it rolls over to John. John picks it up and hands it to him. As he and Derek are watching, John finds the older boy strangely familiar, and when he turns around John sees what is written on the back of his shirt: REESE. John realizes that Derek took him to see a five-year old-version of Kyle and eleven-year-old version of Derek, before telling John that he figured out that Kyle is John's dad as "Whenever I look at you, I see him. Plus, your mom's his type".
In the episode "Goodbye To All That," during one of Derek's recollections of the future war, Kyle (when he was a Corporal) and a small group of his unit, attempted to save forty prisoners, included General John Connor, from Skynet's forces. However, he became trapped and one of the resistance's senior officers, Martin Bedell, sacrifices his life to save him and free Skynet's prisoners. Derek mentions to John that Kyle might have been traumatized when he watched his best friend die after carrying him to an aid station. Derek also tells John of his brother's fondness for using powerful incendiary armor piercing rounds against Hunter-Killers. During the brothers' period of hiding after Judgment Day, Derek killed a deer for food; however, Kyle convinced him that it was unfair for them to eat the animal and Reese buried the deer instead. In the episode "The Demon Hand," it's hinted at by Sarah to Derek Reese that Kyle's remains have been cremated, and scattered "in the grass."
A mental image of Kyle Reese appeared to a wounded Sarah in the episode "The Good Wound". Throughout the episode, her image of Kyle guides her in finding medical treatment for herself, along with getting help from Derek Reese, Kyle's brother.
In the season two finale "Born to Run", John is led by Catherine Weaver to an alternate post-Judgement Day timeline where John Connor has never led The Resistance due to the displacement from his present. There, he encounters his father for the first time alongside Derek Reese and Allison Young.
Kyle Reese is portrayed as a teenager by Anton Yelchin in Terminator Salvation. The film takes place in 2018, and it revolves around his first meeting with his future son John (Christian Bale). As a teenager, Kyle was the leader of the Los Angeles resistance cell, even though this only consisted of two people. Because of this, he aspires to join the formal resistance regulars, who mark themselves with a red stripe on their left sleeve, once he has "earned it." It is clear that Kyle is immediately drawn to the charismatic figure of John Connor due to the fact that he leaves his Los Angeles base immediately after hearing the latter's resistance broadcast. Inspired by Connor's example, he frequently quotes segments of the broadcasts and adapts strategies that Connor suggests for taking down Terminators. He similarly shares a unique bond with Marcus Wright (Sam Worthington), who helps hone Kyle's strategies in close-quarters-combat, whereas Kyle's lectures on what humans are fighting for reminds Marcus of his humanity.
In the film, Kyle's father had initially survived Judgment Day but died prior to the events of the movie, and Kyle is the primary target of Skynet due to its awareness that he would eventually travel through time to 1984 and father John Connor. In the film, Kyle is already working with and protecting a child named Star (Jadagrace Berry) when the two later save Marcus Wright from a T-600 attack in the ruins of Los Angeles. After Skynet captures him outside of LA, Reese, upon escaping, later worked with his future son building a bomb to destroy Skynet's San Francisco Command. The two also fought one of the first T-800 models together during this time. Connor took Reese into the Resistance with Star, granting him the promotion to Tech-Com regular. Kyle and John have begun developing a friendship as mentioned in the first film, evidenced by the way in which Kyle's promotion (signified by inheriting John's tactical jacket with red stripe) comes alongside his joining of John's inner circle at the end of the film.
It was originally scripted that Reese and another soldier, named "Sumner", were sent to protect Sarah from the Terminator, but Sumner died upon arriving after the time portal fused him into a fire escape (the sequels show the time displacement field melting whatever object is in the way). In the original script, Reese says to Dr. Silberman, "The Terminator had already gone through. Connor sent two of us to intercept it, then zeroed the whole place, but Sumner didn't make it." Sumner would later appear in a Sarah Connor Chronicles episode and make it alive through the time portal with Kyle's brother and two other resistance time traveling agents. 
A still shot of Kyle Reese was used as the basis for a pose held by Solid Snake on the box art for the MSX game Metal Gear, right down to the gear he is wearing. Arnold Schwarzenegger was the original choice to play Reese while director James Cameron intended to use a thinner, more ordinary looking actor as the Terminator, his first choice being Lance Henriksen. Upon meeting Schwarzenegger, Cameron decided to cast him as the Terminator instead, and Henriksen was made a police detective. However, Cameron would revisit this idea when he cast Robert Patrick as the T-1000 in the sequel. 
Michael Biehn almost did not get the role of Reese because, at his audition, he spoke in a Southern accent after having just auditioned for a role in a stage production of Cat on a Hot Tin Roof earlier that day and couldn't shake the accent, and the producers did not want Reese to seem regionalized. After Biehn's agent explained this to the producers, he got a second audition and won the part. The original scriptment gave Reese's age as 21, while a later draft gave his age as 22. In real life, Biehn was 27 years old at the time that he was cast as Reese.

Loaded (known as Blood Factory in Japan) is a science fiction-themed top-down shoot 'em up video game that was developed by Gremlin Interactive and published by Interplay. Loaded was released in late 1995–early 1996 (around New Year time) on both the PlayStation and Sega Saturn. The game had origins in DC comics and more notably the more adult-orientated Vertigo Comics, and there was a small graphic novel based on the game. The six playable characters of the game are a combination of villains, anti-heroes, psychopaths, perverts, mutants, and flamboyant murderers. They are, however, the last hope to stop the intergalactic supervillain code-named F.U.B. and save the universe. The characters were created and designed with contributions from Garth Ennis of Vertigo Comics and Greg Staples of 2000AD.
Later in the same year the game spawned a sequel using almost entirely the same characters and the same game engine, albeit one with mildly improved graphics, named Re-Loaded. Re-Loaded was released on the PlayStation and PC at the end of 1996. Although it did not enjoy as good sales as its predecessor, it did however have an acclaimed soundtrack which included music from Pop Will Eat Itself (as did the first game) and the game discs of both games could be played as audio CDs. Both games were notorious for their macabre sense of humor, over-the-top violence and extreme gore.
Loaded was developed by Gremlin Interactive, a British software house based in Sheffield which had previously had a successful run in developing games. Loaded and its sequel Re-Loaded would be among the last games developed by Gremlin Interactive, before it was acquired by French giant Infogrames for £24 million, and the studio in Sheffield closed. The game was internationally published by American-based Interplay.
Loaded was an interesting marketing gimmick when released: considering that the main character design and graphics were done by a host of comic book illustrators like Les Spink and Greg Staples (of 2000AD fame). The games publisher Interplay collaborated with DC Comics (Batman, Superman, Doom Patrol) to create a small 12-page novella illustrated with the game's artwork to promote it and introduce the characters and the game premise. The book was published bundled with DC's works at the time and DC signed adult-orientated Vertigo Comics star Garth Ennis (Preacher, Hellblazer, Hitman, Judge Dredd, etc.) to write it. The novella is now considered a collector's item.
The game is set in the distant future, long after mankind has discovered faster-than-light flight and has since colonized most of the inhabitable worlds across the galaxy. F.U.B. was once a pretty uncultured and incapable catering officer with questionable sanity in the Sector Marines, often screwing up the field kitchens and dropping jars of Plusgrial fnart jiz powder into the cooking pot. F.U.B. (which stands "fat ugly boy", a name he was never able to escape) finally lost his mind on a barren desert front during a relatively minor skirmish of the last 40 years. Not wanting to let "the boys" down and unable to find any meat, F.U.B. amputated his own legs, cooked them and served them up to the soldiers in a hot broth. Despite it being the best dish he had ever created, F.U.B. was given an unconditional discharge and asked never to show his face again. Vowing to get revenge on the worlds of man for his banishment and exile, F.U.B. replaces his legs with mechanical, hydraulic-powered replacements and becomes a feared and egotistical space pirate, attracting other fragile minds to his cause. He undertakes a dramatic, bizarre and insane appearance; wearing furry dice, smoking Havana cigars and tattooing a target on his portly belly.
The six playable characters have notable differences and derangements, but what they have in common is that they are all psychotic mercenaries who have been framed for crimes actually committed by F.U.B. and are now serving life sentences on an inhospitable maximum security prison planet, the planet Raulf. F.U.B. has even taken on a new secretive identity, joining the intergalactic prison system and working his way up the ladder by murdering his superiors and taking their positions, and F.U.B. is now the warden of Raulf. F.U.B. has done this so that he can pin his crimes as a space pirate on other people, usually those who are psychotic anyway so as nobody will notice.
The player (or two of the game's six characters, in two player mode) must escape Raulf, chase F.U.B. and engage on a bloody odyssey across the strange worlds of the galaxy to exact revenge on F.U.B. The supervillain however is merely excited by this, seeing it as a challenge and a game, and to this end he steals the most advanced machine in existence - a machine which can toy with the very fabric of the universe, manipulate matter and even open doorways to other dimensions. With this machine F.U.B. plans to hold the universe to ransom, and sets up a prison break on Raulf to set things in motion. If he can defeat a group of the most feared individuals in the galaxy who are armed to the teeth and wanting revenge, he figures he can defeat anyone.
The game features levels across fifteen different worlds and has six playable characters: Mamma, Fwank, Bounca, Vox, Butch and Cap'n Hands. Two characters may be selected in co-operative mode to complete the game. A mission briefing will begin at the start of every mission, aided by a full motion video sequence. Loaded's gameplay is similar to that of Gauntlet, which requires the player to move room to room killing everything in sight, everything of which will try to kill the player also. Score can be increased by looting the bloodied remains of enemies. There are some puzzle and exploration elements, and power-ups and ammo can be found. The levels progress by collecting keycards capable of unlocking doors. The player can zoom in to their character by pressing R2, or zoom out by pressing L2. At the end of each level, the game tallies the player's greed factor, accuracy and body count on a 0%-100% scale in order to give the player's career prospects (ranging from as low as "social worker" to as high as "genocidal maniac", etc.) and final score.
Loaded features 21 compositions by Neil Biggin, plus 2 tracks by Patrick (Pat) Phelan and 2 more by Pop Will Eat Itself (Kick to Kill and RSVP). The game was specially designed so that it could be placed inside a CD player and used as an audio CD (skipping Track 1 which contained the code for the game). This would then enable the listener to play the full soundtrack - including many hidden tracks. There are 25 audio tracks in total on the CD, the hidden tracks were brief demos and were never used in-game.
The game received mixed reviews, with critics noting that it wasn't exactly a cerebral game, but with others noting that it was nonetheless fun and addictive. Critics are still divided even today, which is evident in the reviews of the game on the GameFaqs website. However the general consensus was positive and Loaded currently has an 82% rating on MobyGames.
Loaded was noted in many reviews for its violence; everything living encountered by the player must be killed, often resulting in explosions of gore. On June 29, 1996, Loaded was put on the infamous German index by the BPjS.
The largest character in the game, a veritable giant, Mamma's real name is unknown and wears a diaper, baby bonnet, wooley hat and bunny slippers. However, both the guards and prisoners of the Raulf prison planet are all terrified of him, due the fact he has a tendency to crush to death anybody who comes near him in a mammoth, bone-cruching, organ-bursting bear hug, which to Mamma is an innocent gesture of friendship; he then believes the crushed bodies are asleep and he will go off looking for his next "cuddle". Mamma was abandoned as a babe in the busiest star port in the galaxy, a place where nobody has any time for anybody else. He is totally without education, manners and most of all the other things which are generally regarded as "civilized". He blunders through life using his very limited vocabulary to get him through all manner of circumstance. The only word he knows, and the only thing that keeps him going is the word "MAMMA!", lending him his name. Obviously he missed something as an infant. His lineage is therefore something of an unknown quantity, but one thing is certain - his mother was friendly with something large and simian. Quite a scary and unpredictable man to have around, even if you are scary and unpredictable yourself. Mamma's weapon is the Plasma Gun and his bomb is the Ripple Grenade, used when Mamma creates a wave through the ground that instantly kills a large amount of foes around him. This attack can travel through walls and doors. Mamma has a very good armor rating but a slow speed.
Featured on the cover of the game, Fwank is a very heavily-built and thoroughly psychotic man donning a bank bag over his face with the bag painted, making him resemble a clown. Almost child-like in demeanour (although not so much as Mamma), he has a notable lisp, which causes him to mis-pronounce words (Rs are substituted with Ws), providing his nickname. Fwank killed his parents, and his "pwobation officer", when he was young, and the graphic novel explains that he was lobotomized at age six, although his true name is never revealed. His body is described as "that of a steroid-eating wilderbeest who doesn't shower". Fwank looks upon other lifeforms as toys for his amusement or worse, expendable cardboard targets at a fairground attraction. The only things he cares about is his collection of teddy bears, especially the one he calls Percy, and keeping his weapon well oiled. Fwank makes one concession to his fellow lifeforms; he ties a mood balloon to his back pack indicating the general ballpark of his demeanour (green for "chuckly", yellow for "I need space", and red for "I wouldn't ask if I were you"). Fwank's weapon of choice is a cannon that fires Neutron Spheres, and his bombs are Homing Teddies, a floating armada of teddy bears containing explosives that eviscerate nearby foes. This attack can kill enemies stationed directly behind a door, but cannot travel through walls and doors. However, the teddies can follow Fwank and stay in use longer to attack incoming enemies. Fwank has stats almost similar to Mamma; Fwank has a good armor rating but a slow speed.
Not quite as big as Mamma, the tuxedo-wearing Bounca is nonetheless a mammoth of a man and still towers over most other lifeforms. He has spent his adult life as a security guard, personal bodyguard, and mostly as a bouncer. Certainly one of the most widely travelled and employed organisms in the history of the galaxy, he has seen amazing sights that even the most intrepid galactic explorers would go green at; hidden planets, lost continents and the like. Bounca has a slight problem though; he is incredibly thick. Not just a bit thick, enormously thick. All of his experiences amount to a big fat zero, because the only thing he finds interesting is "slappin some innocent geeza about a bit". You might as well have sent a baboon around the galaxy and then questioned it about its experiences, as it is probably more perceptive and definitely less likely to kill you for asking. He lost his lower jaw fighting an alien monster twice as big as him, who was trying to enter a doorway Bounca was watching over; Bounca won the fight, but had to have his lower jaw replaced with a giant, metallic, serrated muzzle. His weapon is a Missile Launcher and his bomb is the Frag Missile, a randomly-moving burst of shrapnel. This attack can not travel through walls and doors. The all-rounder of the group in stats, Bounca has a medium armor rating and a moderate speed.
The only female in the game, Vox is a former sound engineer, disc jockey, and glamour model, often called "The Siren" due to her mixed beauty and extremely sharp tongue and temper, and overall devastating sexy countenance. Vox uses modified sound and music technology to kill foes in the game, self developed with the aid of Gabbist Monks, an order who take the vow to never have a second's peace and quiet and are masters in the art of amplification. The device they collaborated on is slung across her back and has a number of "Rapmaster" microphones channelling sound to it via boom mikes on her visor. The sound waves created act as shock waves and are capable of turning Vox's enemies into bubbling pools of protoplasm. Her weapon is the Hail Flail and her ultra bomb is the Sonic Blast, an extremely potent and charged burst of lethal sound waves. This attack can travel through walls and doors. Vox is small and light, with a poor armor rating but is the fastest character in speed, making it easy for her to even dodge bullets.
A muscular, balding transvestite man that wears ladies' dresses in combat and dislikes those that find his cross-dressing funny. He brutally murders anybody who snickers at his attire. The game manual and also the graphic novel explain that it is not through choice however; every time he escapes he simply grabs the nearest item to hand, which unfortunately by a staggering twist of fate always happens to be women's clothing in some form. Butch's favoured weapon is a flamethrower named the "Flaming Queen", and his bomb is the Explosive Ring, the release of fireballs in all directions within Butch's radius. This attack can travel through walls and doors. Instead of splattering enemies into a bloody heap, the Flaming Queen and the Explosive Ring actually chars enemies' bodies on contact. He has a medium armor rating and fast speed, although not as fast as Vox, making him the second fastest character in the game.
A pirate-like character with freakishly large hands and forearms, a cowboy hat and an exposed ribcage. Cap'n Hands has been around for centuries and nothing is known of his origins, although the rumors range from being a pirate who was operating in the Caribbean during the Golden Age of Piracy of the late 1600s, or even a cowboy from the Old American West of the 1800s. Up until recently, before he was captured by the authorities, Cap'n Hands was a leader of the feared and despised "Cirates", a group of cybernetically-enhanced space pirates. Only his head is an original part of his human body and that too is rotten to the core. The rest of his powerful frame is an old and out-of-date cyborg design which he could have replaced over 200 years ago when technology took a giant leap forward, but he likes it. Another reason he keeps this ancient and obsolete skeleton is for its amazing array of original art and engravings which decorate the majority of its panels, showing his numerous exploits and stories through space. He has kept the inmates of Raulf prison amused and beguiled for hours on end with stories of how he acquired them, and with his famous "dancing bare lady" design (only his close friends and people who are about to expire horribly generally get to see that though). The truth is, Cap'n Hands cannot remember who he was before he became a cybernetic, skeletal pirate, simply because it was so long ago, and his mind isn't what it used to be. His weapons are a pair of old flintlock muskets which he has customized for rapid energy fire, although he has made sure they still retain their trademark sound of old. His bomb is the Vortex Bomb, a curtain of dark energy that shreds enemies to pieces. This attack can travel through walls and doors. Cap'n Hands has an average armor rating, and moderate speed, being the third fastest character behind Vox and Butch.
Less than a year after the original game was released, a sequel was released also for the PlayStation and the PC entitled Re-Loaded, developed and published by the same companies. It featured the same game engine, and even the game menus are the same, although it is a game engine with slightly improved graphics. Four characters from the original game are also in Re-Loaded, such as Mamma, Bounca, Butch, and Cap'n Hands. Vox, however, is not present in the game and is replaced by two new female characters: a pink-haired, cannibalistic sex symbol named the Consumer, and a malfunctioning android nun named Sister Magpie. Via cheat code, Sister Magpie can unlock hidden character Fwank from the previous game for use in Re-Loaded. If unlocked, Fwank is the best character in Re-Loaded, with the most speed and best armor. All of the returning characters have new weapons and/or variations of their costumes. There are twelve blood-soaked new worlds to annihilate, much bigger than the levels encountered in the previous game, and with the added bonus of being able to morph the surrounding terrain with high-powered weaponry and explosives. The game will be coming soon on PSN Store as it can already be seen listed by the ESRB Website that it's coming to PSN as a PSOne Classic. 
F.U.B., the antagonist of Loaded, had his body destroyed at the end of the previous game, although his brain fled in an escape pod. Landing on a harsh desert world, Kee-Butt-5, his brain has been implanted into the body of a chiselled, bronzed young artist hermit named Manuel Auto, and then he murdered the loyal surgeons responsible for giving him a new body. Reincarnated and renamed "C.H.E.B.", which stands for "Charming Handsome Erudite Bastard", the former raving lunatic supervillain has taken on some of the aspects of his host body, the creative, artistic and thoughtful Manuel Auto. With his matter manipulation powers, C.H.E.B. plans to transform whole planets into "Works Of Art and Genuis", starting with his own body which he grows to the size of a small moon. Once again the group of blood-thirsty anti-heroes gather to bring him down once and for all and set off for Kee-Butt-5...
Re-Loaded, despite having notably better graphics then the original game, was not as well received and currently has a rating of 48% on MobyGames. The soundtrack however, this time entirely composed by Neil Biggin, was acclaimed as better than the original and indeed one of the best aspects of the game. Like the previous game, it could be played as an audio CD.
On June 28, 1997, Re-Loaded was put on the infamous German index by the BPjS, like its predecessor.
The Lyceum (Ancient Greek: Λύκειον, "Lykeion") was a gymnasium and public meeting place in Classical Athens named after the god of the grove that housed the Lyceum, Apollo Lyceus. Apollo was also the Greek “wolf-god.” Though best known for its connection with Aristotle and the peripatetic school he led there, the Lyceum was in existence long before Aristotle’s formal founding in 334 or 335 BC and continued under several heads until the Roman general Sulla sacked Athens in 86 BC. The remains of the Lyceum were discovered in modern Athens in 1996.
Speculation suggests that Pericles or Pisistratus may have originally opened the first building of the Lyceum, as a gymnasium, in the fifth or sixth centuries BC, though the Lyceum grounds would have predated the gymnasium. In the early years of the Lyceum the head of the Greek army was said to have had an office there, which would have made it easy for him to be involved in the military training and exercises which the grounds were used for. The Lyceum’s use as a recreational gym and military training base is supported by the existence of wrestling rings, a racetrack, and seats for athlothetai, the judges of athletic events. 
A long list of philosophers and sophists gave talks at the Lyceum prior to Aristotle, including Prodicus of Ceos, Protagoras and Rhapsodes. The most famous philosophers to have taught there, however, were Isocrates, Plato (of The Academy) and the best-known Athenian teacher, Socrates. In addition to military training and educational pursuits, the Lyceum also housed Athenian Assembly meetings before the Pnyx became the official meeting place in the fifth century BC. Cult practices of various groups were also held at the Lyceum.
In 335 BC, Athens fell under Macedonian rule and Aristotle, aged 50, returned from Asia. Upon his return to Athens, Aristotle began teaching regularly in the morning in the Lyceum and founded an official school, The Lyceum. After his morning lessons Aristotle would frequently lecture on the grounds for the public, and manuscripts of his compiled lectures were eventually circulated. The group of scholars who followed the Aristotelian doctrine came to be known as the Peripatetics due to Aristotle’s tendency to walk as he taught. 
Aristotle’s main foci as a teacher were cooperative research, an idea which he founded through his natural history work and systematic collection of philosophical works to contribute to his library. His students were assigned historical or scientific research projects as part of their studies. The school was also student run. The students elected a new student administrator to work with the school leadership every ten days, allowing all the students to become involved in turn. Before returning to Athens, Aristotle had been the tutor of Alexander of Macedonia, who became the great conqueror Alexander the Great. 
Throughout his conquests of various regions, Alexander collected plant and animal specimens for Aristotle’s research, allowing Aristotle to develop the first zoo and botanical garden in existence. It is also suspected that Alexander donated what would be the equivalent of more than 4 million dollars to the Lyceum. In 322 BC Aristotle was forced to flee Athens with his family when the political leadership reacted against the Macedonians again and his previously published works supporting Macedonian rule left him a target. He passed on his Lyceum to Theophrastus and died later that year in Chalcis, near his hometown. 
Theophrastus placed a provision in his will that left the Lyceum library, which at this point included both his and Aristotle’s work as well as student research, philosophical historical texts and histories of philosophy, to his supposed follower, Neleus. However, the seniors of the Lyceum placed Strato as the next leader and upon his retirement from the school in the mid third century BC, Neleus divorced the Lyceum from its library and took all of the books with him to Skepsis in Mysia. 
The library then disappeared for several centuries until it appears to have been bought from Neleus’ heirs in the first century BC and returned to the school. However, when Sulla attacked Athens, the books were shipped to Rome. Throughout their travels one fifth of Aristotle’s works were lost and thus are not a part of the modern Aristotelian collection. Still, what did remain of Aristotle’s works and the rest of the library were arranged and edited for school use between 73 and 20 BC, supposedly by Andronicus of Rhodes, the Lyceum’s eleventh leader. Since then the remaining works have been translated and widely distributed, providing much of the modern knowledge of historic philosophy.
As head of the Lyceum, Theophrastus continued Aristotle’s foci of observation, collaborative research and documentation of philosophical history, thus making his own contributions to the library, most notably as the first organizer of botany. Though he was not a citizen of Athens (he had met Aristotle in the 340s in his homeland of Lesbos) he managed to buy land near the main gym of the Lyceum as well as several buildings for the library and additional workspace in 315 BC. Theophrastus also continued his own work while teaching and demonstrated his devotion to learning and education by leaving the land of the Lyceum to his friends to continue their work in education in philosophy in the non-private tradition of the school upon his death. 
During the era of Theophrastus and his successor, Strato of Lampsacus, the Lyceum experienced a decline until it fell with the rest of Athens in 86 BC. There is some thought that the Lyceum was refounded in the first century AD by Andronicus of Rhodes, and no matter its secondary founder, it once again flourished as a philosophical school in the second century and continued until Athens was once again sacked in 267 AD.
Theophrastus headed the Lyceum for 36 years, between Aristotle’s exile from Athens in 322 BC until his own death in 286 BC. There is some speculation that both Aristotle and Theophrastus were buried in the gardens of the Lyceum, though no graves have been positively identified. Theophrastus was followed by Strato, who served as head until 268. Lyco of Troas, likely Aristo of Ceos, Critolaus, Diodorus of Tyre and Erymneus were the next several heads of the school. Additionally, Andronicus of Rhodes served as the eleventh head. 
At various points in the history of the Lyceum numerous scholars and students walked its parapetoi, though some of the most notable include Eudemus, a mathematical historian, Aristoxenus, who wrote works on music, and Dicaearchus, a prolific writer on topics including ethics, politics, psychology and geography. Additionally, medicinal historian Meno and an eventual ruler of Athens, Demetrius of Phaleron spent time at the school. Demetrius of Phaleron ruled Athens as a proxy leader for a dynasty from 317-307 BC.
During 1996 excavation to clear space for Athens’ new Museum of Modern Art the remains of Aristotle’s Lyceum were uncovered. Descriptions from the works of ancient philosophers hint at the location of the grounds, speculated to be somewhere just outside the eastern boundary of ancient Athens, near the rivers Ilissus and Eridanus and Mount Lykabettos, which is just where the remains were found. In present-day Athens the excavation site is located between Rigilis and Vasilissis Sofias, 200 yards from the British Embassy and behind the War Museum. The first excavations revealed a gymnasium and wrestling area, but further work has uncovered the majority of what is believed to have withstood the erosion caused to the region by nearby architecture’s placement and drainage. Upon realizing the magnitude of the discovery beneath the parking lot to be transformed into the museum, secondary plans were made for nearby construction of the art museum so that it could be combined with a Lyceum outdoor museum and give tourists easy access to both attractions. There are plans for a large outdoor roof to be placed over the Lyceum remains, and the area was slated to open for the public in summer 2009. 
The Manchester and Salford Yeomanry cavalry was a short-lived yeomanry regiment formed in response to social unrest in northern England in 1817. The volunteer regiment became notorious for its involvement in the 1819 Peterloo Massacre, in which as many as 15 people were killed and 400–700 were injured. Often referred to simply as the Manchester Yeomanry, the regiment was disbanded in 1824.
After the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, many textile workers in the newly industrialised towns of northern England lost their jobs as a result of an economic slump connected to the reduced need for war materiel. Even for those still employed, rising food prices made life very difficult. At the same time, writers such as William Cobbett were denouncing the inequity of the electoral system, as evidenced by rotten boroughs. Poor mill workers were a naturally sympathetic audience for a succession of radical organisers and speakers who spoke of electoral reform and alleviating poverty.
This radical movement deeply worried many supporters of the Tory party, particularly in northern England. The fear of popular revolt had begun with the American and French revolutions in the late 18th-century. Many Tory supporters, such as mill owners, landowners and tradesmen, saw the agitation for suffrage as little less than sedition. The Tory party strongly opposed the proposed reforms.
On 10 March 1817, about 5,000 people met in St Peters Field in central Manchester, aiming to march to London to set their grievances before the Prince Regent. Each person carried a rug or blanket, leading them to be named Blanketeers. The march was quickly suppressed, but Manchester Tories worried that they lacked protection from the hostile masses. This fear spurred a petition with more than 100 signatures to "the Boroughreeves and Constables of Manchester and Salford" demanding a meeting to establish a yeomanry corps. The constables organized the meeting for 19 June 1817. Wheeler's Manchester Chronicle reported that those present resolved "that under the present circumstances it is expedient to form a body of Yeomanry Cavalry in the Towns and neighborhood of Manchester and Salford". The newspaper noted that government allowances were available for uniforms, and that if neighboring towns formed their own corps they might be later combined. Each man was to provide his own horse.
Thomas Trafford, owner of substantial lands in Lancashire and Cheshire, was commissioned as the cavalry's first Major-Commandant on 23 August 1817. As with many yeomanry regiments of the time, it was a relatively inexperienced militia recruited from among shopkeepers and tradesmen. A notice in the London Gazette on 6 October 1818 listed the appointment of officers to the corps over the past year.

On 16 August 1819, Major Trafford and Lieutenant Colonel Guy L'Estrange, the overall military commander in Manchester, were sent notes by a magistrate, William Hulton, urging them to dispatch troops to a public meeting on voting reform being addressed by the orator Henry Hunt.
The notes were handed to two horsemen standing by. The Manchester and Salford Yeomanry were stationed just a short distance away in Portland Street, and so received their note first. Trafford dispatched 116 officers and men of the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry who immediately drew their swords and galloped towards St Peter's Field. One trooper, in a frantic attempt to catch up, knocked down a woman in Cooper Street, causing the death of her child when he was thrown from her arms; two-year-old William Fildes was the first casualty of Peterloo. special constables were already present at the meeting, but no troops.
Sixty cavalrymen of the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry, led by Captain Hugh Hornby Birley, a local factory owner, arrived at the house from where the magistrates were watching; some reports allege that they were drunk. Andrews, the Chief Constable, instructed Birley that he had an arrest warrant which he needed assistance to execute. Birley was asked to take his cavalry to the hustings to allow the speakers to be removed; it was by then about 1:40 pm. Major Trafford himself appears not to have been present for the disastrous attack on the assembled crowd that followed.
The route towards the hustings between the special constables was narrow, and as the inexperienced horses were thrust further and further into the crowd they reared and plunged as people tried to get out of their way. The arrest warrant had been given to the Deputy Constable, Joseph Nadin, who followed behind the yeomanry. As the cavalry pushed towards the speakers' stand they became stuck in the crowd, and in panic started to hack about them with their sabres. On his arrival at the stand Nadin arrested Hunt, Johnson and a number of others including John Tyas, the reporter from The Times. According to Tyas the yeomanry's progress through the crowd had provoked a hail of bricks and stones, and caused them to lose "all command of temper". Their mission to execute the arrest warrant having been achieved, they then set about destroying the banners and flags carried by the crowd.
From his vantage point William Hulton perceived the unfolding events as an assault on the yeomanry, and on L'Estrange's arrival at 1:50 pm, at the head of his hussars, he ordered them into the field to disperse the crowd with the words: "Good God, Sir, don't you see they are attacking the Yeomanry; disperse the meeting!" The 15th Hussars formed themselves into a line stretching across the eastern end of St Peter's Field, and charged into the crowd. At about the same time the Cheshire Yeomanry charged from the southern edge of the field. At first the crowd had some difficulty in dispersing, as the main exit route into Peter Street was blocked by the 88th Infantry Regiment, standing with bayonets fixed. One officer of the 15th Hussars was heard trying to restrain the by now out of control Manchester and Salford Yeomanry, who were "cutting at every one they could reach": "For shame! For shame! Gentlemen: forbear, forbear! The people cannot get away!" Within ten minutes the crowd was dispersed, at the cost of at least 11 dead and over 600 injured.
The government and landowners viewed the yeomanry's actions at Peterloo as a courageous defence against insurrection. Following the massacre, on 27 August 1819, Lord Sidmouth sent a message of thanks from the Prince Regent to Major Trafford, among others. However, public horror at the actions of the yeomanry grew after the massacre. Major Trafford resigned his commission in 1820, and the yeomanry corps was disbanded on 9 June 1824.

Matt Saracen is a fictional character in the NBC/DirecTV (The 101 Network) television drama series Friday Night Lights portrayed by the actor Zach Gilford. He was the former backup quarterback of the Dillon High School Panthers before being thrust into the starting spotlight after Jason Street suffered a career-ending injury.
Matt is the son of Henry Saracen and Shelby Garrett, and lives alone with his grandmother, Lorraine Saracen. Matt takes care of Lorraine due to her old age and battle with dementia.
At one time, Matt's relationship with both of his parents were strained. Henry was a member of the Armed Forces who showed no signs of caring for his son's troubles, and Shelby left Matt when he was a child after divorcing Henry (the full extent of their relationship is unknown but it is implied that Henry may have been an abusive husband). During his senior year of high school, Matt slowly began reconnecting with his mother, who desperately wanted to be a part of her son's life again. The season after graduating Matt's father dies after stepping on an IED.
When the series begins, Matt is the back-up quarterback, hardly getting noticed on the field due to Jason Street being the top high school quarterback in the nation. Along with his best friend Landry Clarke, he is a social outcast, and not as popular as some of his teammates. That all changes when Jason suffers a career-ending injury, and Matt is forced into becoming the starting quarterback. The town and team is crushed by Jason's injury, going so far as to force Coach Taylor to find a new quarterback, as no one (besides Coach) believes Matt can get the job done. As Matt continues to work his heart out and impress his teammates, a new quarterback, Ray "Voodoo" Tatum joins the team and temporarily replaces Matt as the starter, before his lack of being a team player forces Coach Taylor to bench him and give the starting position back to Matt. He finished his sophomore season with a 60% completion percentage, 2,586 yards, 19 touchdowns, 5 interceptions, and a 121.3 quarterback rating. In the state championship game, Saracen passed for 283 yards and 2 touchdowns in leading the Panthers to a 27-26 epic comeback victory over West Cambria High School.
Matt also began a relationship with Coach Taylor's daughter, Julie. At first it was a one sided crush, as Julie had no intentions of ever dating a football player. But as the season progressed, she slowly began to return the feelings. Coach Taylor was not too pleased that they were dating and would often interfere in their relationship. However, both Matt and Julie made it clear that they were going to be together whether coach approved or not. Matt also develops a father-son bond with Coach Taylor and feels betrayed when Coach Taylor accepts a job at TMU. Matt tells Julie that even though she will no longer be living in Dillon, they will stay together.
Season 2 begins with Matt's relationship with Julie (who has stayed in Dillon with her mom while Coach Taylor lives in Austin) falling apart. Julie's feelings for her co-worker along with problems at home cause the two to break up. Julie tries to reconcile but Matt refuses and quickly begins dating the new cheerleader at school. Matt's friendship with Smash also begins falling apart. Matt believes that Smash does not care for the team now that he is a senior and only cares for himself and his college prospects. The two get into a fight after the first game of the season and continue fighting until the returning Coach Taylor benches them until they can get their act together. They quickly realize they're fighting for nothing and become friends again.
Problems at home force Matt to get an at-home nurse, named Carlotta, for his grandmother. At first, neither Matt nor his grandmother like Carlotta very much, but soon begin to welcome her into their home. Matt develops feelings for Carlotta and breaks up with his girlfriend so that he can be with her. She denies him at first but gives in and sleeps with him. Their relationship does not last long, as Carlotta leaves the Saracen house to return to her family. A heartbroken Matt begs her to stay, but it's not enough.
Tired of everything he has gone through, Matt begins skipping school and practice so he can get drunk with Tim. A night at the strip club with Tim ends early when his grandmother has an accident at home and is taken to the hospital. Matt passes out waiting for his grandmother to be released, which forces Coach Taylor to drive both home. A furious Coach throws Matt into a cold shower and berates him before Matt breaks down, asking Coach what is wrong with him that everyone in his life leaves him for something "better." Coach responds by telling Matt there is nothing wrong with him at all.
Season 3 begins almost a year after the conclusion of Season 2. Matt's quarterback position is threatened when a new freshman quarterback, J.D. McCoy, moves to Dillon to play for the Panthers. While Matt is still playing well, J.D.'s skills along with town pressure forces Coach Taylor to give J.D. the starting position permanently. Matt, furious over Coach Taylor's decision, threatens to quit before Coach talks him out of it. Matt agrees to stay on the team and sit on the bench but tells Coach that he'll hate it just as much as he does. After a few weeks on the bench, Matt suggests that Coach Taylor give him the wide receiver position, saying he'll be an asset since he already knows all the plays. Coach hesitates but gives him the position. Matt's final game as a Panther sees him return to the quarterback position in the second half of the State Championship game after a poor performance from J.D.. The team is able to get back into the game after being shut out, but they lose in the end when the other team kicks a field goal.
During the season, Matt slowly begins reconnecting with his mother, who he sets out to find in order to become an emancipated minor and take care of his grandmother's medical issues. After learning about Matt's problems, his mother comes to Dillon hoping that Matt will allow her to help out at home even if he doesn't forgive her for leaving when he was a child. Matt also reconnects with Julie, getting back together after a day at the lake. Coach Taylor once again is not too pleased, especially after catching Julie in bed with Matt.
Matt's college prospects also come into play during the season. Knowing he won't be playing football anywhere after being benched, Matt looks at different art schools, settling for the Art Institute of Chicago. Knowing he'll be away from home, he helps his grandmother move into an assisted living home. In the end, Matt changes his mind, unable to leave his grandmother knowing that she was the only person who stayed by his side all his life.
Season 4 marks the transition period for Matt Saracen, and the eventual permanent departure of his character as the show shifts its focus to other characters. Upon hearing the news that his father had been killed in action in the war, a devastated Matt attempts to make sense of his life. After the family is awarded compensation for his father's death along with life insurance (enough money for his grandma to live comfortably for the rest of her life), the burden that Matt placed upon himself to take care of his grandma was lifted. With a seemingly new lease on life, Matt abruptly leaves for Chicago in order to pursue art, leaving behind a devastated Julie and Landry. Matt is shown a few episodes later living and working in Chicago. He calls Julie to apologize for not telling her about his decision, but she refuses to accept his apology. Matt returns to Dillon for Thanksgiving, hoping to finally make amends with Julie and Landry. He tells Julie that if he didn't leave when he did, he would have never left. He still wishes to be with her and had already bought her a plane ticket back to Chicago. Julie, still caring for Matt and wanting to go with him, says no, realizing she wouldn't be able to pursue her own dreams in the process. Matt knows she is right and the two amicably go their separate ways. Matt gives his ticket to Landry, who tells him that going around the city with his grandma would be no fun.
The former Soviet republic of Georgia has a monarchic tradition that traces its origins to the Hellenistic period. The medieval Kingdom of Georgia ruled by the Bagrationi dynasty has left behind a legacy that lasts in Georgia even in modern times. The qualities and symbols associated with the Bagrationi monarchy have been crucial in the making of the Georgian nation and the subsequent construction of national history. Their rule ended with the annexation of Georgian lands by the Russian Empire early in the 19th century, although several branches of the dynasty survive to this day. The monarchic restoration was considered by various royalist groups throughout the 20th century. Although Georgia’s politics has been taking place in the framework of a presidential republic since the nation regained its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, the debate on monarchy, particularly its constitutional form, has never actually ceased. The issue came up most recently amid a political crisis in late 2007. 
 
The Russian Empire absorbed the two principal Georgian kingdoms, those of Kartli-Kakheti and Imereti in 1801 and 1810, respectively. The members of the dispossessed royal dynasty fomented a series of rebellions against Russian rule, but all of them failed. The Russian administration, using a combination of military pacification and diplomatic persuasion, succeeded in winning a degree of loyalty of local elites. The Bagrationi princes themselves subsequently bowed to the inevitable and reconciled with a fait accompli.
Shortly after the Decembrist revolt of 1825, royalist Georgians in St. Petersburg and Moscow, urged on by the grandsons of the penultimate king of Georgia Erekle II, the princes Okropir and Dimitri, tried to convince Georgian students in the two Russian cities that Georgia should be independent under the Bagrationi dynasty. Okropir visited Tiflis in 1829 and helped found a secret society with the aim of restoring the Georgian monarchy. Inspired by the French revolution of 1830 and the Polish insurrection of 1830-1831, the conspirators were united in their anti-Russian sentiment but divided in their program although the majority favored a restoration of the Bagrationi to the Georgian throne. The planned coup was prevented by the police in 1832.
The loyalty of Georgian nobility to the Russian Tsar, won by liberal politics of the Imperial viceroy Prince Vorontsov (1844-1854), began to fade in the 1860s. Yet, after the Georgian royalist-led conspiracy in 1832, no Georgian movement or political party called for an outright independence until World War I.
During the World War I years, Georgian émigrés, under the guidance of Prince Matchabelli established a National Committee in Berlin which considered a reinstatement of a monarchy in Georgia under the German protectorate. An influential lobby of the idea was Otto von Lossow, who suggested putting the German prince Joachim on the Georgian throne. However, following the Russian Revolution of 1917, Georgians restored their independent state in the form of a democratic republic (May 26, 1918), the result of a long-time domination of Georgian political scene by Social Democrats. Georgian nobility, including the scions of the former royal dynasty, lent their support to a new republic. As a contemporary Western observer noted: "Like that of France, the Georgian nobility has a social rather than a political significance. The people are democratic in spirit; there is not the least chance of a revival of monarchy in Georgia, and the nobles will hardly have more political weight than their individual merit entitles."
The Democratic Republic of Georgia fell to Soviet Russia’s Red Army invasion in 1921. The subsequent political repressions, especially during the abortive August Uprising in 1924, forced many of the Bagrationi family members to flee the Soviet Union; some of them died in purges.
One of the émigrés, Prince Irakli of the House of Mukhrani (a collateral branch of the Bagrationi dynasty) (1909-1977), tried to enlist the support of European powers for a Georgian monarchist cause. After settling in Spain before the war, Prince Irakli founded what he called the Royal House of Georgia and sought support from European governments for a Georgian monarchy independent from Stalin's Soviet Union. When Prince Irakli died in Spain in 1977, George became first in line to the royal house of Georgia and was recognised as such, albeit as a formality, by the government and parliament of the new independent republic in 1991, despite rival claims from others. The legitimate rights of this House to the throne have frequently been questioned, however, due to the fact the patrilineal descendants of the last king of Georgia – the Bagration-Gruzinsky – still survive in Georgia. This line is currently represented by Prince Nugzar Bagration-Gruzinsky (born 1950), the heir male of Georgia's last reigning king, George XII. However, the two branches acted to resolve this conflict by uniting through the marriage of David of Mukhrani with Nugzar's daughter Anna in February 2009. 
As Georgia was moving towards independence from the Soviet Union early in the 1990s, monarchical restoration was an issue on the fringes of politics, but without actual candidates to a throne and popular support for monarchy. Various Georgian political groups tried to negotiate a return of Jorge de Bagration, Head of the Royal House of Georgia, and even sent a delegation to Madrid to persuade the reluctant prince. Some political activists, especially those associated with the National Democratic Party, speculated that a constitutional monarchy in Georgia would help scotch any efforts by Moscow to keep Georgia inside the Soviet Union. After Georgia’s declaration of independence on April 9, 1991, weak and fractious opposition groups again raised the issue of restoration hoping to neutralize Zviad Gamsakhurdia, the first popularly elected President of Georgia, and his authoritarian tendencies.
During the rule of Eduard Shevardnadze (1992-2003), no serious consideration was given to monarchist ideas although several minor political parties, including the Union of Georgian Traditionalists led by the former parliamentary chairman Akaki Asatiani, continued to advocate a constitutional monarchy as a form of Georgia's government.
The debate on a constitutional monarchy was revitalized with the emerging political crisis in Georgia later in 2007. The October 7, 2007 sermon of Catholicos-Patriarch Ilia II, the popular head of the Georgian Orthodox Church, gave an impetus to a renewed political debate. The patriarch, who has always sympathized with the idea of constitutional monarchy, said, during his Sunday service at the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, that the restoration of the royal dynasty was a "desirable dream of the Georgian people". He also emphasized that if the people of Georgia chose this model of governance, "a candidate to the crown should be selected among representatives of the royal dynasty, and he should be suitably raised to be King from childhood."
The Patriarch’s sermon gave an unexpected continuation to the political crisis in Georgia. Although the Patriarch’s sympathies towards the monarchy is not something new for the regular parish to hear, several opposition parties immediately seized on the opportunity to advance their slogan "Georgia without a President", a reference to the model of parliamentary rule advocated by the Georgian opposition. Many politicians expressed their support to a constitutional monarchy, with a transitional stage in the form of a parliamentary republic.
The authorities' response to the calls for a monarchy was restrained. Nino Burjanadze, a chairperson of the Parliament of Georgia, has expressed skepticism about the idea and stated that Georgia will not be able to decide on such an important issue until its territorial integrity is restored, referring to the secession in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. President Mikheil Saakashvili, having jokingly remarked on his remote Bagratid ancestry, said that "serious considerations are necessary on this issue so that we do not add new problems to the already existing ones." Giga Bokeria, an influential member of the parliament from Saakashvili’s United National Movement, tried to soft-pedal the Patriarch’s statement: "The patriarch didn’t suggest establishing monarchy today. He meant this may happen after Georgia resolves its fundamental problems." He later alleged that the opposition’s call for a constitutional monarchy was merely a populist move: "they speak about constitutional monarchy here and do not say anything about it abroad. This is their double-standard policy." Ilia II himself has avoided further comment on the topic. 
Meanwhile, the opposition New Rights party, which stood aside from the anti-government demonstrations staged by a coalition of ten opposition parties in October and November 2007, became the only major political group to add a more nuanced view on the establishment of a constitutional monarchy to their agenda. They issued a special declaration supporting the idea and proposing to hold a referendum on the issue, a suggestion which was also included in the pre-election campaign of David Gamkrelidze, a candidate from the New Rights/Industrialists bloc for the early presidential elections held on January 5, 2008.
A monarchy option has always caused an ambiguous resonance in Georgia. On the one hand, the monarchy is considered a symbol of Georgian unity and independence, and on the other hand it belongs to a remote past, with a significant gap of more than 200 years in monarchic tradition. Thus, according to one survey conducted back in 1998, only 16.3% of 828 respondents believed that a monarchy would be a good or very good form of government for Georgia when asked how suitable they think various types of government were or would be for Georgia. There are no significant recent public opinion surveys available though a small and limited Internet poll at the MediaNews agency website shows, as of December 23, 2007, only a 2% support for monarchy. Critics point out that the wide majority of Georgians do not have internet service, or participated in the survey, and therefor reject the results.
The skeptics say the restoration of the monarchy is technically impossible due to several reasons including the number of candidates and an unsettled question of succession to the Georgian throne. Additionally, they believe that the criteria for selecting the king will lead to major disagreements.
The supporters of constitutional monarchy continue to argue that this form of state would best protect the interests of citizens of Georgia; a monarch "would reign not rule", and act as a safeguard of stability and national unity. They see the return to monarchy as a "historical justice", referring to the fact that the native royal dynasty has never been rejected or overthrown by the Georgian people, but was dispossessed by a foreign power (i.e., Russia).
Morning and Noon: A Memoir is an autobiographical book written by former United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson in 1965. In it Acheson describes the meaningful times and events of his early life — from his birth in 1893 up to the time of his swearing in as the U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs on February 1, 1941.
In his "Introduction", the author explains that this book is about the significant moments of his early life and career, but that there are gaps in the history, which he explains as being from the parts of his life that were either uninteresting, too painful to recall, or too personal to share. As to where he ended the narrative in this book, he referred to that time as the middle of his middle age when a "sea change" was occurring between him and the events around him. As the title implied, he intended to continue his story in subsequent works.
Referring to it as his "golden age of childhood", Acheson describes his experiences while growing up in the Connecticut Valley town of Middletown, Connecticut. He provides light-hearted descriptions of childhood perceptions and memorable characters, including his Canadian-American parents.
This chapter was previously published in part by the Saturday Evening Post on December 15, 1962.
The author recounts his summer of 1911, while working at a railroad camp near Cochrane, Ontario, on the construction of the Canada's trans-continental railroad, the Grand Trunk Pacific (later called the Canadian National). He describes the hardships of working as the low man on the totem pole, while also recollecting the enjoyable interactions with his co-workers.
Begins with Acheson's arrive in Washington, D.C., in September 1919 to serve as the clerk for U.S. Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis. He arrived at a time of major change — President Woodrow Wilson had suffered a stroke and had disappeared from public life, the Republicans had taken conrol of congress in 1918, and the hopes of U.S. ratification of the Treaty of Versailles and U.S. membership in the League of Nations had dwindled. During his time with Brandeis, Republican Warren G. Harding was elected President, and in 1921 former Republican President William H. Taft became Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.
Much of this chapter describes Acheson's respect for, and daily interactions with Justice Brandeis. He also expresses his appreciation for Brandeis's mentorship and the wide spectrum of Washington society he met through this association.
The title of this chapter is borrowed from Justice Brandeis's use of the phrase in reference to the U.S. Supreme Court of the early 1920s. Acheson describes the members of the court, comparing their philosophies and their approaches to deciding the cases that came before them. He includes later hindsight in his evaluation of the justices and their decisions from that time.
In this chapter Acheson provides a detailed analysis of Justice Brandeis's approach to his role on the Supreme Court, and how that translated into the expectations he had of Acheson as his clerk. The topics in this chapter range from the justice's judicial philosophy and work ethic, to Acheson's daily routine. Acheson ends the chapter with an assessment of the Justice's influence on him, concluding with an excerpt from the tribute he gave at Brandeis's funeral in 1941.
Acheson looks back at the history of liberalism in the United States. He begins by defining the litmus test issues of the day, during the last years of the Wilson administration and during the Harding years. He summarizes the successes and failures of the liberal movement since the 1920s, speculates about the strategic or political weaknesses of the movement, and closes by musing that if he had written this chapter 25 years earlier, it would have disqualified him as a liberal.
By "top", Acheson refers to his first legal work as helping to represent a national government in an international case before the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague. Employed by the law firm Covington & Burling for the case, he assisted co-founder Edward B. Burling in representing the Government of Norway, which sought payment from the United States government for the taking of Norwegian-owned property during World War I.
After providing background information on the principals of Covington & Burling, Acheson recounts his experience abroad, his participation in the case and its outcome, and the acquaintances he made in the process.
Acheson returns to Washington and continues to work for Covington & Burling as their caseload rapidly expands. He describes some of the cases on which he assisted. His growing exposure to Washington insiders leads him to ponder about the sources of "practical" and "judicial statesmanship." After the nation went through economic frenzy and then faced economic desister, a friend invites him to he Democratic National Convention in 1932, after which he worked energetically to help Franklin D. Roosevelt get elected president. Acheson volunteered to help the new administration draft legislation to reduce government expenditures and was invited to White House meetings. He concludes this chapter with the observation: "Thus does one get drawn closer and closer to the flypaper of taking part in government."
In this chapter Acheson recounts his experience as the U.S. Undersecretary of the Treasury in the Roosevelt administration. He was recruited in May 1933 to serve under Treasury Secretary William H. Woodin, accepted, and was confirmed to the post. Soon after, however, Woodin was incapacitated by illness and Acheson served as acting Secretary. The author explains his open opposition to the President's plan to fight crippling deflation by taking the U.S. dollar off the gold standard and thereby reducing its value. FDR eventually tired of his opposition and forced his resignation in November. The author provides newspaper quotes covering his appointment, tenure, and resignation.
In this chapter Acheson describes his return to private law practice with Covington & Burling and summarizes some of the case on which he worked. For him a highlight of this period was when he served as the representative of his friend and former law professor, Felix Frankfurter, in January 1939 during Senate confirmation hearings after FDR's appointment of Frankfurter to the U.S. Supreme Court. As war seemed imminent in Europe, Acheson became increasingly vocal supporting the need for America to ready for war and to stop the Axis power of World War II. The chapter ends with his swearing in as the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs on February 1, 1941.
In this section Acheson includes the full text of documents and speeches to which he makes reference in the body of the book. There is a wealth of information regarding the gold-standard debate during his service as Undersecretary of the Treasury. He also includes the full text of a speech he gave at Yale in November 1939, and a memo to Harry Hopkins urging American preparation for war in 1940.
Charles Poore, book reviewer for The New York Times, summed up his response in his review title — "The Glow Is Mellow, the Substance Diamond-Hard". As to the book's overall content, he wrote, "Since Mr. Acheson disavows formal autobiography at the outset, we are spared the obscure bayous with which zealous hoarders of their own accomplishments fill out their landscapes." In describing Acheson's style, he wrote: "Like a good letter writer, Mr. Acheson talks less about himself than about others. He unfailingly catches traits that make people live before your eyes."
The New York Times also published a review of this book by Stephen K. Bailey, the dean of the Maxwell Graduate School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University, and a former mayor of Acheson's home town of Middletown, Connecticut. Bailey commented on what Middletown had meant to Acheson, and Acheson to Middletown, and speculated that the author's experiences growing up there had prepared him for his later remarkable performance in public service. Bailey summarized his impression of the book with: "What comes through is a man disciplined in work and style who has never lost his zest for life; who loves freedom and appreciates its cost; who delights in the tricks of reason and the safety valves of ribaldry; who understands but is not cowed by the perversities and narrow tolerances which mark and limit every civilized advance."
Targjei Augundsson (1801- November 21, 1872), better known as Myllarguten (meaning the Millerboy), is arguably the most acknowledged Norwegian folk musician to this day, and by far the most legendary.
Targjei was born in Sauherad, Telemark. The date of his birth is disputed (the years range from 1799 to 1801), and some say his father Augund was only registered as the father of the boy (in the local church documentation). He married Gunhild, the mother, in October 1801. Targjei was already born at the time. Usually, farmers of the Norwegian serfdom stock is not very well documented, often moving from homestead to homestead. 
Myllarguten's father was a country fiddler, one of many at the time, and Targjei was going for the fiddle from early age, but it is told he feared his father would beat him if he tried the instrument. So he sneaked himself to playing while his father was outside and at work at the local mill. His father's profession gave Targjei his name, the Millerboy. One day the father returned early from work and heard someone inside playing, and asked astonished who the player was. His wife, Gunhild, had to admit it was his son Targjei. From then on, Augund his father trained him, but the boy was so eager his father had to give him away to other fiddlers in the area.
Amongst his teachers were the fiddlers Knut Lurås from Tinn, Jon Kjos from Åmotsdal, Mattis Flathus from Sauherad and Øystein Langedrag from Bø. The latter had been a soldier in the Napoleonic wars and had some experience with military music, which influenced his style, and to a degree the style of Myllarguten. The fiddler he regarded the best of his teachers, was Knut Lurås, one of two colleague fiddlers he really appreciated. As his reputation grew, Targjei was known as a hard critic and a merciless competitor. He did not like to be bested at playing. The other he held in esteem, was Håvard Gibøen, regarded as his traditional counterpart in folk music from Telemark. Håvard was the only fiddler of whom Targjei would say: "He is the master of us all".
Life as a fiddler was a life on the road. He soon got reputation, and played from early on at weddings and county feasts all over Telemark. He soon made longer journeys, and spanned the country as far as Bergen and Gudbrandsdalen. He eventually got married, with Ingebjørg Eddandshaugen from Vinje, and had ten children by her, of whom at least four sons became fiddlers themselves, and through them, the music from Targjei has been passed on down to this day in Telemark.
Myllarguten was a difficult person, an imaginative musical artist, but painstakingly slow in all other tasks than playing. He could use a day on matters other more practical persons finished in a couple of hours. He was eager to learn dance-tunes, and turned them around in his own way, making them longer and richer than before. Thus, he laid the ground for a brand new way of playing the hardanger fiddle in Telemark.
In 1831 he met Ole Bull in Bergen and became his friend for life. Bull was on a short visit between tours, and was at the time looking for a personal and national expression. He had not yet opened his mind for the rural music, but when hearing Myllarguten, he got exactly what he had looked for. Later, he said: "There has not been a one fiddler that has made me content in such a way". The two understood each other, and soon became friends. Bull wrote down some of the tunes he heard, and borrowed Myllarguten's fiddle, and in turn played classical music for the fiddler. They both came enriched from the meeting, and Bull always played some Norwegian folk music on his concerts after this. Thus, he made the rural tunes known to a larger public for the first time. The meeting had lasting impact in the evolving romantic nationalism in Norway.
After this meeting, they did not meet again for 17 years, until Bull endeavored to make a concert with Myllarguten in Christiania February 1849, when romantic nationalism was at its very peak in Norway. The concert became a commercial success, and the hall was packed with 1500 excited listeners, among them some from Telemark, who had got free tickets. The known author Aasmund Olavsson Vinje decided not to go, afraid that the concert might go awry for the sensible fiddler, and would not be held responsible as a man from the same district, which he was. 
When going on stage, Myllarguten had to break his crate open with a knife, and was delayed several minutes. This made him nervous, and he started playing other tunes than the appointed. But he soon played himself into ecstasy as was his wont, and the audience cheered. Newspapers called him a "true child of nature", and praised him with eulogies and poems. On the other hand, the urban audience was more excited by the event than the music, as the traditional music was and is a music for trained ears. When the romantic wave died down, Myllarguten became a has-been, and was regarded as nothing more than a "drunken Telemark farmer".
The concerts gave him money to raise a farm in Rauland, and the more experienced farmer Rikard Aslaksson Berge helped him in this. Myllarguten had played at his wedding, and was a regular guest at the farm. Thus, his music was passed on to Rikard's sons, and from them to his grandson Eivind Groven.
In spite of his successes abroad, Targjei was not able to keep his money, and had to leave his farm in the end. The last years of his life, he was tired of playing, and became gradually harder to ask. Sometimes, he became depressed and cursed both his fiddle and Ole Bull and all the rest. He felt alone, frustrated and lost, but was still appreciated by his own community.
Myllarguten died a pauper in 1872, and his funeral was timid, only one single boat and no flowers (it was custom to travel to the church by water, crossing the lake Totak. That was easier than taking the road). He is buried at the cemetery at Rauland in Telemark. It was reckoned a pity that this should befall the greatest fiddler in Norway. But he is well remembered, and through his descendants passed on a vivid musical tradition that lives on in Telemark to this very day. All the county honors his memory. A memorial stone was later set up at his grave.
Myllarguten was from the beginning a traditional folk musician, schooled and educated in local tradition. The meeting with Ole Bull had a lasting impact on his style, and he began to explore the limits of his instrument i new and more advanced ways. He also turned his tonality more towards the classical ideals, rather than the more rural blue note. In 1853, Carl Schart, an organist in Bergen, transcribed five of Myllarguten's tunes, and those came later into print . This example shows a vivid musical mind, and a great performer.
Most of the sources for Myllarguten's life were written down from living memory, accounted by people who had met the fiddler, and his close relatives. Other sources exist as articles by romantic nationalists in Norway, who met the fiddler and described him. All the material was collected and edited by the folklorist Rikard Berge, himself from Telemark, and grandson of Rikard Aslaksson as mentioned above. He had first-hand information, and collected material for twelve years, from 1896 to 1908, meeting many older people who remembered Myllarguten. Thus, he put together a thorough and useful biography and a valuable source.
Concerning the meeting of Ole Bull and Myllarguten: Told by the farmer Rikard Aslaksson Berge, as rendered by Myllarguten himself, Tor Vaa from Rauland, and Gregar Torgeirsson, Myllarguten's son. The latter also told of the concert in Christiania, which is also well documented from contemporary written material.
Concerning the fiddler's childhood: Told by Gunnhild Flatastøyl, daughter-in-law, Ingebjørg Pilodden from Sauherad, and Gregar Torgeirsson. 
Myllarguten's technical abilities and musical style: Øystein Hovdestad, Vinje, among others.
His funeral: Signe Øydgarden, Rauland. She was an eye-witness to the event.
All the material is edited and published in Rikard Berge Myllarguten-Gibøen, Noregs Boklag 1972 (second edition). The original biography was published in 1911.
Nathan Christopher Fillion (born March 27, 1971) is a Canadian actor, known for his lead role as Captain Malcolm Reynolds in the television series Firefly and its film continuation Serenity, and his current lead role as Richard Castle on the ABC series Castle.
Fillion has been involved in TV soap operas, the theater, traditionally distributed films like Slither and Trucker, Internet-distributed films like Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog, and voice-over work such as in the video game Halo 3. He has also been recognized for his looks in People and Entertainment Weekly.
Fillion's public service work includes the co-founding of Kids Need to Read, an organization dedicated to getting more books into underfunded libraries.
Fillion was born in Edmonton, Alberta, the son of Cookie and Bob Fillion, both of whom are retired English teachers. He has an older brother, Jeff, and attended Holy Trinity Catholic High School, Concordia University College of Alberta and the University of Alberta, where he was a member of the Kappa Alpha Society. According to Fillion, he is descended from Confederate Lieutenant General Jubal Anderson Early.
After working in several theatre, television and film productions, including Theatresports with Rapid Fire Theatre and the improvised soap opera Die-Nasty, Fillion moved to New York City in 1994 where he acted in the soap opera One Life to Live as Joey Buchanan, for which he was nominated in 1996 for a Daytime Emmy Award in the "Outstanding Younger Actor" category. In 1997, he left the series to pursue other projects (but would return for a brief guest appearance in 2007). After moving to Los Angeles, he played a supporting role in the sitcom Two Guys, a Girl, and a Pizza Place and was cast as "James Frederick Ryan" or "The Minnesota Ryan" in Steven Spielberg's Saving Private Ryan.
In 2002, Fillion starred as Captain Malcolm Reynolds in the Joss Whedon science fiction television series Firefly, for which he won the "Cinescape Genre Face of the Future - Male" award by the Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films, USA. Fillion also won the Syfy Genre Awards in 2006 for Best Actor/Television and was runner-up for Best Actor/Movie. Although the show was cancelled, it was adapted to the big screen; Fillion reprised his role as Mal in Whedon's movie Serenity (2005). He also had a recurring role as Caleb in the final season of Whedon's series Buffy the Vampire Slayer. Fillion considered his time on Firefly to be the best acting job he ever had.
He also auditioned for the role of Angel in early 1996.
Fillion has lent his voice to the animated series King of the Hill in 2001, the video game Jade Empire (as the voice of Gao the Lesser), and the animated series Justice League Unlimited (as Vigilante in the episodes "Hunter's Moon" and "Patriot Act") in 2005 and 2006. Fillion starred in James Gunn's 2006 horror film Slither. For his starring role as Bill Pardy, he garnered a 2006 Fangoria Chainsaw Awards nomination in the category of Dude You Don't Wanna Mess With.
Fillion starred in the romantic comedy film Waitress, written and directed by the late Adrienne Shelly, which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival January 21, 2007 and opened in theaters on May 2, 2007. According to Box Office Mojo, Waitress grossed $22,125,001 in worldwide sales as of May 13, 2008, and $29.22 million in rentals as of January 28, 2008.
Fillion also starred in White Noise 2: The Light.
He has made one appearance in the 2006-2007 season of the television show Lost, as Kevin, Kate's ex-husband.
In October 2006, Fillion signed a talent holding contract with the Fox Broadcasting Company, and in December 2006, The Hollywood Reporter confirmed that Fillion was cast in the lead role of Alex Tully in the series Drive, which debuted on Fox in the spring of 2007.
Drive was created by Fillion's longtime friend and former Angel and Firefly writer Tim Minear. Ivan Sergei played Alex Tully in the original pilot episode of Drive. The first two Drive episodes premiered on April 13, 2007 in Canada (April 15, 2007 in the United States). However, the show did not deliver the ratings Fox desired, and on April 25, 2007, the network announced that the series was cancelled.
The final two produced episodes were supposed to air back-to-back on Fox in July 2007, but did not actually become available until July 15 when they were posted on the Drive MySpace page. Fox has since removed Drive episodes from that Myspace. All six episodes are now available for download from Amazon.com and iTunes.
Fillion reprised his 1990s role as One Life to Live's Joey for the series' 9,999th and 10,000th episodes, aired August 16, 2007 and August 17, 2007.
Fillion joined the cast of ABC's Desperate Housewives at the beginning of the Fall 2007 season as Dr. Adam Mayfair, a gynecologist. His first appearance was in the episode "Now You Know", which aired on September 30, 2007.
Fillion plays the voice of a Marine Sergeant in the Xbox 360 game Halo 3. He is joined by his Firefly co-stars Adam Baldwin and Alan Tudyk who both voice marines. At one point early in the first mission, he identifies himself as "Sergeant Reynolds" over the radio, referring to his character's name from the TV series Firefly. All three actors are given personalities in the game that match those of their characters from Firefly. He is the voice actor for Gunnery Sergeant Edward Buck in the Halo 3 expansion, Halo 3: ODST.
The independent feature film Trucker, in which Fillion played the character Runner, premiered at the New York 2008 Tribeca Film Festival. Trucker was released on October 9, 2009.
On March 21, 2008 Fillion finished filming Joss Whedon's Internet-distributed short Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog starring Fillion as Captain Hammer, Neil Patrick Harris as Dr. Horrible and Felicia Day as Penny. It was first available on the Internet as three episodes (14 minutes each) starting on July 15, 2008.
In March of 2009 the first episode of the ABC television series Castle aired, in which Fillion stars as the title character Richard Castle, a mystery novelist who helps the NYPD solve crimes. In May 2009, ABC green-lit the production of the series for a second season. On March 30, 2010, ABC announced that Castle had been renewed for its third season with a 22-episode full-season order. The role earned Fillion a Ewwy nomination in 2009 for Best Actor in a Comedy Series. ABC is promoting Castle by releasing a Richard Castle novel Heat Wave online and worldwide in hardback. 
Nathan Fillion made EW's The Must List: What's Hot for the Week of Oct. 5, 2008.
Fillion also is featured in a spoof porn web video on Spike called "Nailing Your Wife", part of the PG Porn series.
The Wonder Woman animated DVD in which he voice acted the character Steve Trevor debuted #5 on the 3/08/09 Numbers DVD Sales chart.
Fillion has been recognized several times for his looks including in 2007 when he was featured in People's Sexy Men issue under the "Domestic Bliss/Guys Worth Running Home to" section. He was also listed as one of Entertainment Weekly's "50 Actors We'd Watch in Anything.
"Sky TV has described him as "TV's Ultimate Cult Hero."
Fillion co-founded the non-profit organization Kids Need to Read with author PJ Haarsma in 2007 to help inspire kids' imaginations by getting more books into underfunded libraries. Fillion believes strongly that every child deserves the chance to read good books. While speaking at schools around the country, Haarsma discovered that many libraries cannot afford to purchase new books and children pleaded with him to get a copy of his book. Fillion asked his fans to direct their energies into something he believed was a worthwhile cause.



Nova was a high-power laser built at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) in 1984 which conducted advanced inertial confinement fusion (ICF) experiments until its dismantling in 1999. Nova was the first ICF experiment built with the intention of reaching "ignition", a chain reaction of nuclear fusion that releases a large amount of energy. Although Nova failed in this goal, the data it generated clearly defined the problem as being mostly a result of magnetohydrodynamic instability, leading to the design of the National Ignition Facility, Nova's successor. Nova also generated considerable amounts of data on high-density matter physics, regardless of the lack of ignition, which is useful both in fusion power and nuclear weapons research.
Inertial confinement fusion (ICF) devices use drivers to rapidly heat the outer layers of a target in order to compress it. The target is a small spherical pellet containing a few milligrams of fusion fuel, typically a mix of deuterium and tritium. The heat of the laser burns the surface of the pellet into a plasma, which explodes off the surface. The remaining portion of the target is driven inwards due to Newton's Third Law, eventually collapsing into a small point of very high density. The rapid blowoff also creates a shock wave that travels towards the center of the compressed fuel. When it reaches the center of the fuel and meets the shock from the other side of the target, the energy in the shock wave further heats and compresses the tiny volume around it. If the temperature and density of that small spot can be raised high enough, fusion reactions will occur.
The fusion reactions release high-energy particles, some of which (primarily alpha particles) collide with the high density fuel around it and slow down. This heats the fuel further, and can potentially cause that fuel to undergo fusion as well. Given the right overall conditions of the compressed fuel—high enough density and temperature—this heating process can result in a chain reaction, burning outward from the center where the shock wave started the reaction. This is a condition known as ignition, which can lead to a significant portion of the fuel in the target undergoing fusion, and the release of significant amounts of energy.
To date most ICF experiments have used lasers to heat the targets. Calculations show that the energy must be delivered quickly in order to compress the core before it disassembles, as well as creating a suitable shock wave. The energy must also be focused extremely evenly across the target's outer surface in order to collapse the fuel into a symmetric core. Although other "drivers" have been suggested, notably heavy ions driven in particle accelerators, lasers are currently the only devices with the right combination of features.
LLNL's history with the ICF program starts with physicist John Nuckolls, who predicted in 1972 that ignition could be achieved with laser energies about 1 kJ, while "high gain" would require energies around 1 MJ. Although this sounds very low powered compared to modern machines, at the time it was just beyond the state of the art, and led to a number of programs to produce lasers in this power range.
Prior to the construction of Nova, LLNL had designed and built a series of ever-larger lasers that explored the problems of basic ICF design. LLNL was primarily interested in the Nd:glass laser, which, at the time, was one of a very few high-energy laser designs known. LLNL had decided early on to concentrate on glass lasers, while other facilities studied gas lasers using carbon dioxide (e.g. Antares laser, Los Alamos National Laboratory) or KrF (e.g. Nike laser, Naval Research Laboratory). Building large Nd:glass lasers had not been attempted before, and LLNL's early research focussed primarily on how to make these devices.
One problem was the homogeneity of the beams. Even minor variations in intensity of the beams would result in "self-focusing" in the air and glass optics in a process known as Kerr lensing. The resulting beam included small "filaments" of extremely high light intensity, so high it would damage the glass optics of the device. This problem was solved in the Cyclops laser with the introduction of the spatial filtering technique. Cyclops was followed by the Argus laser of greater power, which explored the problems of controlling more than one beam and illuminating a target more evenly. All of this work culminated in the Shiva laser, a proof-of-concept design for a high power system that included 20 separate "laser amplifiers" that were directed around the target to illuminate it.
It was during experiments with Shiva that another serious unexpected problem appeared. The infrared light generated by the Nd:glass lasers was found to interact very strongly with the electrons in the plasma created during the initial heating through the process of stimulated Raman scattering. This process, referred to as "hot electron pre-heating", carried away a great amount of the laser's energy, and also caused the core of the target to heat before it reached maximum compression. This meant that much less energy was being deposited in the center of the collapse, both due to the reduction in implosion energy, as well as the outward force of the heated core. Although it was known that shorter wavelengths would reduce this problem, it had earlier been expected that the IR frequencies used in Shiva would be "short enough". This proved not to be the case.
A solution to this problem was explored in the form of efficient frequency multipliers, optical devices that combine several photons into one of higher energy, and thus frequency. These devices were quickly introduced and tested experimentally on the OMEGA laser and others, proving effective. Although the process is only about 50% efficient, and half the original laser power is lost, the resulting ultraviolet light couples much more efficiently to the target plasma and is much more effective in collapsing the target to high density.
With these solutions in hand, LLNL decided to build a device with the power needed to produce ignition conditions. Design started in the late 1970s, with construction following shortly starting with the testbed Novette laser to validate the basic beamline and frequency multiplier design. This was a time of repeated energy crises in the U.S. and funding was not difficult to find given the large amounts of money available for alternative energy and nuclear weapons research.

During the initial construction phase, Nuckolls found an error in his calculations, and an October 1979 review chaired by John Foster Jr. of TRW confirmed that there was no way Nova would reach ignition. The Nova design was then modified into a smaller design that added frequency conversion to 351 nm light, which would increase coupling efficiency. The "new Nova" emerged as a system with ten laser amplifiers, or beamlines. Each beamline consisted of a series of Nd:glass amplifiers separated by spatial filters and other optics for cleaning up the resulting beams. Although techniques for folding the beamlines were known as early as Shiva, they were not well developed at this point in time. Nova ended up with a single fold in its layout, and the laser bay containing the beamlines was long. To the casual observer it appears to contain twenty long beamlines, but due to the fold each of the ten is actually almost long in terms of optical path length.
Prior to firing, the Nd:glass amplifiers are first pumped with a series of Xenon flash lamps surrounding them. Some of the light produced by the lamps is captured in the glass, leading to a population inversion that allows for amplification via stimulated emission. This process is quite inefficient, and only about 1 to 1.5% of the power fed into the lamps is actually turned into laser energy. In order to produce the sort of laser power required for Nova, the lamps had to be very large, fed power from a large bank of capacitors located under the laser bay. The flash also generates a large amount of heat which distorts the glass, requiring time for the lamps and glass to cool before they can be fired again. This limits Nova to about six firings a day at the maximum.
Once pumped and ready for firing, a small pulse of laser light is fed into the beamlines. The Nd:glass disks each dump additional power into the beam as it passes through them. After passing through a number of amplifiers the light pulse is "cleaned up" in a spatial filter before being fed into another series of amplifiers. At each stage additional optics were used to increase the diameter of the beam and allow the use of larger and larger amplifier disks. In total, Nova contained fifteen amplifiers and five filters of increasing size in the beamlines, with an option to add an additional amplifier on the last stage, although it is not clear if these were used in practice.
From there all ten beams pass into the experiment area at one end of the laser bay. Here a series of mirrors reflects the beams to impinge in the center of the bay from all angles. Optical devices in some of the paths slow the beams so that they all reach the center at the same time (within about a picosecond), as some of the beams have longer paths to the center than others. Frequency multipliers upconvert the light to green and blue (UV) just prior to entering the "target chamber". Nova is arranged so any remaining IR or green light is focused short of the center of the chamber.
The Nova laser as a whole was capable of delivering approximately 100 kilojoules of infrared light at 1054 nm, or 40-45 kilojoules of frequency tripled light at 351 nm (the third harmonic of the Nd:Glass fundamental line at 1054 nm) in a pulse duration of about 2 to 4 nanoseconds and thus was capable of producing a UV pulse in the range of 16 trillion watts.
Research on Nova was focussed on the "indirect drive" approach, where the laser shine on the inside surface of a thin metal foil, typically made of gold, lead, or another "high-z" metal. When heated by the laser, the metal re-radiates this energy as diffuse x-rays, which are more efficient than UV at compressing the fuel pellet. In order to emit x-rays, the metal must be heated to very high temperatures, which uses up a considerable amount of the laser energy. So while the compression is more efficient, the overall energy delivered to the target is nevertheless much smaller. The reason for the x-ray conversion is not to improve energy delivery, but to "smooth" the energy profile; since the metal foil spreads out the heat somewhat, the anisotropies in the original laser are greatly reduced.
The foil shells, or "hohlraums", are generally formed as small open-ended cylinders, with the laser arranged to shine in the open ends at an oblique angle in order to strike the inner surface. In order to support the indirect drive research at Nova, a second experimental area was built "past" the main one, opposite the laser bay. The system was arranged to focus all ten beams into two sets of five each, which passed into this second area and then into either end of the target chamber, and from there into the hohlraums.
Confusingly, the indirect drive approach was not made widely public until 1993. Documents from the era published in general science magazines and similar material either gloss over the issue, or imply that Nova was using the direct drive approach, lacking the hohlraum. It was only during the design of NIF that the topic become public, so Nova was old news by that point.
As had happened with the earlier Shiva, Nova failed to meet expectations in terms of fusion output. In this case the problem was tracked to instabilities that "mixed" the fuel during collapse and upset the formation and transmission of the shock wave. The maximum fusion yield on NOVA was about 1013 neutrons per shot. The problem was caused by Nova's inability to closely match the output energy of each of the beamlines, which meant that different areas of the pellet received different amounts of heating across its surface. This led to "hot spots" on the pellet which were imprinted into the imploding plasma, seeding Rayleigh–Taylor instabilities and thereby mixing the plasma so the center did not collapse uniformly.
Nevertheless, Nova remained a useful instrument even in its original form, and the main target chamber and beamlines were used for many years even after it was modified as outlined below. A number of different techniques for smoothing the beams were attempted over its lifetime, both to improve Nova as well as better understand NIF. These experiments added considerably not only to the understanding of ICF, but also to high-density physics in general, and even the evolution of the galaxy and supernovas.
Shortly after completion of Nova, modifications were made to improve it as an experimental device. One problem was that the experimental chamber took a long time to refit for another "shot", longer than the time needed to cool down the lasers.
In order to improve utilization of the laser, a second experimental chamber was built "past" the original, with optics that combined the ten beamlines into two. Nova had been built up against the older Shiva buildings, with the two experimental chambers "back to back" and the beamlines extending outward from the center target areas. The Two Beam system was installed by passing the beamguides and related optics through the now unused Shiva experimental area and placing the smaller experimental chamber in Shiva's beam bay.
Nova's partial success, combined with other experimental numbers, prompted Department of Energy to request a custom military ICF facility they called the "Laboratory Microfusion Facility" (LMF) that could achieve fusion yield between 100 and 1000 MJ. Based on the LASNEX computer models, it was estimated that LMF would require a driver of about 10 MJ, in spite of nuclear tests that suggested a higher power. Building such a device was within the state of the art, but would be expensive, on the order of $1 billion. LLNL returned a design with a 5 MJ 350 nm (UV) driver laser that would be able to reach about 200 MJ yield, which was enough to access the majority of the LMF goals. The program was estimated to cost about $600 million FY 1989 dollars, and an additional $250 million to upgrade it to a full 1000 MJ if needed, and would grow to well over $1 billion if LMF was to meet all of the goals the DOE asked for. Other labs also proposed their own LMF designs using other technologies.
Faced with this enormous project, in 1989/90 National Academy of Sciences conducted a second review of the US ICF efforts on behalf of the US Congress. The report concluded that "considering the extrapolations required in target physics and driver performance, as well as the likely $1 billion cost, the committee believes that an LMF i.e. a Laser Microfusion Facility with yields to one gigajoule is too large a step to take directly from the present program." Their report suggested that the primary goal of the program in the short term should be resolving the various issues related to ignition, and that a full-scale LMF should not be attempted until these problems were resolved. The report was also critical of the gas laser experiments being carried out at LANL, and suggested they, and similar projects at other labs, be dropped. The report accepted the LASNEX numbers and continued to approve an approach with laser energy around 10 MJ. Nevertheless the authors were aware of the potential for higher energy requirements, and noted "Indeed, if it did turn out that a 100-MJ driver were required for ignition and gain, one would have to rethink the entire approach to, and rationale for, ICF."
In July 1992 LLNL responded to these suggestions with the Nova Upgrade, which would reuse the majority of the existing Nova facility, along with the adjacent Shiva facility. The resulting system would be much lower power than the LMF concept, with a driver of about 1 to 2 MJ. The new design included a number of features that advanced the state of the art in the driver section, including the multi-pass design in the main amplifiers, and 18 beamlines (up from 10) that were split into 288 "beamlets" as they entered the target area in order to improve the uniformity of illumination. The plans called for the installation of two main banks of laser beamlines, one in the existing Nova beamline room, and the other in the older Shiva building next door, extending through its laser bay and target area into an upgraded Nova target area. The lasers would deliver about 500 TW in a 4 ns pulse. The upgrades were expected to allow the new Nova to produce fusion yields between 2 and 20 MJ The initial estimates from 1992 estimated construction costs around $400 million, with construction taking place from 1995 to 1999.
For reasons that are not well recorded in the historical record, later in 1992 LLNL updated their Nova Upgrade proposal and stated that the existing Nova/Shiva buildings would no longer be able to contain the new system, and that a new building about three times as large would be needed. From then on the plans evolved into the current National Ignition Facility.
Starting in the late 1980s a new method of creating very short but very high power laser pulses was developed, known as chirped pulse amplification, or CPA. Starting in 1992, LLNL staff modified one of Nova's existing arms to build an experimental CPA laser that produced up to 1.25 PW. Known simply as Petawatt, it operated until 1999 when Nova was dismantled to make way for NIF.
The basic amplification system used in Nova and other high-power lasers of its era was limited in terms of power density and pulse length. One problem was that the amplifier glass responded over a period of time, not instantaneously, and very short pulses would not be strongly amplified. Another problem was that the high power densities led to the same sorts of self-focusing problems that had caused problems in earlier designs, but at such a magnitude that even measures like spacial filtering would not be enough, in fact the power densities were high enough to cause filaments to form in air.
CPA avoids both of these problems by spreading out the laser pulse in time. It does this by reflecting a relatively multi-chromatic (as compared to most lasers) pulse off a series of two diffraction gratings, which splits them spatially into different frequencies, essentially the same thing a simple prism does with visible light. These individual frequencies have to travel different distances when reflected back into the beamline, resulting in the pulse being "stretched out" in time. This longer pulse is fed into the amplifiers as normal, which now have time to respond normally. After amplification the beams are sent into a second pair of gratings "in reverse" to recombine them into a single short pulse with high power. In order to avoid filamentation or damage to the optical elements, the entire end of the beamline is placed in a large vacuum chamber.
Although Petawatt was instrumental in advancing the practical basis for the concept of "fast ignition fusion", by the time it was operational as a proof-of-concept device, the decision to move ahead with NIF had already been taken. Further work on the fast ignition approach continues, and will potentially reach a level of development far in advance of NIF at HiPER, an experimental system under development in the European Union. If successful, HiPER should generate fusion energy over twice that of NIF, while requiring a laser system of less than one-quarter the power and one-tenth the cost. Fast ignition is one of the more promising approaches to fusion power.
When Nova was being dismantled to make way for NIF, the target chamber was lent to France for temporary use during the development of Laser Megajoule, a system similar to NIF in many ways. This loan was controversial, as the only other operational laser at LLNL at the time, Beamlet (a single experimental beamline for NIF), had recently been sent to Sandia National Laboratory in New Mexico. This left LLNL with no large laser facility until NIF started operation, which was then estimated as being 2003 at the earliest. Work on NIF was not declared formally completed until March 31, 2009.

Odo B. Stade (July 2, 1892–March 5, 1976) was born in Krautheim, Germany (now Saint Louis, Alsace) and was a resident of Glendora, California and renowned scholar. His life included a career as Navy lieutenant, charge d'affaires in Mexico, activist, author, poet, actor, stunt pilot, manager and owner of the Hollywood Bookstore, linguist, teacher and world traveler. His challenging and rewarding life brought him in contact with many parts of the world, many professions and people from all walks of life.
Odo was the first of eight children of one of the oldest family clans in Hungary, Stade ab Palffy. As a child he spent six months of the year in Strassburg, and the other six months in the wealthy family's country place at Trentschen Teplitz, Hungary. There was a great estate in Hungary with a tremendous stand of virgin forest and a hunting lodge in the Tartara Mountains, which Russia aqcuired after World War II. The place in Budapest was 600 years old, and the family had a little palace in Vienna.
Palffy was the family name on Odo's grandmother's side. She was a good friend of the Empress Elizabeth. Grandmother Palffy played duets with Liszt. Odo's known family history goes back to 896. His paternal grandmother was a von Scheele, educated mainly in England. It was her brother who in 1866 took the blind King from Hanover to Vienna on horseback to save his life, when Hanover ceased to be a kingdom. After this feat of bravery, this brother was made a director of the Spanish Riding Institute, which still exists. They ride their mounts in chandeliered halls of the Hofburg, one time Imperial Castle of the Habsburgs. It was exiled during the occupation, and only recently returned to Vienna. Odo's father was a friend of his uncle (mother's brother), and in 1874, he went to see him at the riding school, and there he met Ilka ab Palffy, in 1874. They were married in 1887.
Odo's mother was Hungarian. The family name was Szechenye. His father was Norwegian, Flemish and French, and his name was De Stade. He was a surgeon, and worked on the development and perfection of twilight sleep. Odo's mother thus married a commoner – a surgeon, and the family cut her off.
When the first son (Odo) was born, the uncle brought the family together, and Odo was designated to take on the name of Palffy when he became of age. This is why he spent six months in Hungary each year, learning the ancestral traditions and the family ways.
The De Stade family was musical. One sister played the viola. Odo's mother played the piano beautifully and sang. Odo played the violin, and played in symphony concerts before he was sixteen.
Odo wanted to become a doctor, but his father objected. At the age of 14, Odo recalls that he assisted his father in an emergency operation, after being awakened in the night. During the last ten years of his life, Odo's father was the court surgeon. He died at the age of 58 on a visit to his sister's home in Brazil.
Odo was given instruction by a tutor who remained with him until he was ready to go to the University where he majored in philology.
Odo graduated "cum laude" when only fifteen and was able to join the Naval Academy in 1907 at Pola. During these years and the subsequent years as Naval lieutenant, he saw much of the world, including North and South America.
Following his uncle's wish, he resigned from the Navy in 1912 and joined the Austro-Hungarian Foreign Office. At the end of November 1912, Odo received orders to leave for Mexico as chargé d'affaires. The Austrian Minister had been absent from Mexico City since early in 1910 and Odo had the ungrateful task of creating order out of chaos, a condition aggravated by the revolution in that unhappy country.
Having seen the peon system in Hungary, he believed it was even worse in Mexico. Sympathizing with the commoner, Odo was against Huerta, the new dictator, so he joined the opposition, Francisco (Pancho) Villa, the underdog. Now employed by the international cartel, French-owned International Company of Mines and Exploration, Odo entered into an agreement with Villa: if Villa permitted his gold shipments to leave the troubled country, Odo would represent Villa in securing munitions and supplies for the rebel forces.
As Villa's purchasing agent charged with developing an air force, his job sent him back and forth across the border to purchase guns, ammunition, and all the material essentials for Villa's soldiers, horses, and vehicles. Odo managed to ship $14 million in gold bullion from the country before he had to leave Mexico. During this time he met most of the leaders and generals, among them Carranza, Felipe Angeles, Governor José María Maytorena, &c. and made numerous trips to Washington to consult with Ambassador Dumba. President Wilson personally consulted with Odo during some of these trips to learn about the progress of Villa.
Odo was wounded twice, and once had his knee shot to pieces. Before the revolution was over, he left Mexico, suffering from typhoid malaria and in a desperate physical condition. Illness and wounds forced Odo to go to California in order to regain his health. It was during this last escape to California that Odo brought with him many of Villa's personal effects, including a pair of boots, saddle, rifle, and Colt revolver, which he gave to young Michael Rubel (builder of Rubel Castle in Glendora) in the 1960s.
Upon arriving in California, Odo called on Mr. Adam Clark Vroman, famous photographer and prominent bookseller of Pasadena, California. Mr. Vroman offered to employ him as a clerk in his store. Odo accepted the kind offer and remained with Vroman's Books for some six months, when he was forced to quit his job by his lingering illness.
His doctor recommended living in the wild, so in May 1916 Odo hiked to Tahoe and on to the High Sierras where he lived off the land for six months. He had weighed only 108 pounds when he left for the mountains, and when he came back, he weighed 174. During this phase he helped establish the altitudes of many of the Sierra peaks.
Upon his return from the Sierras Odo accepted, encouraged by Mr. Vroman, the managership of the Hollywood Bookstore, then owned by Mr. Frederick G. Leonard. At that time, Hollywood was still a small town and the motion picture industry in its infancy. The social life centered around the Hollywood Hotel and the cultural life around the bookstore and small library across the street. Odo was the first to write book reviews for the recently founded "Holly Leaves," a magazine printing motion picture news, social news and the life of the community as a whole.
1915 was also the year Odo first visited Glendora, which was "back country." Michigan Avenue (now Glendora Ave.) was the only oiled street in town. At this time Odo visited the ranger station. Head ranger Sloan was planting trees at the time, and Odo planted a pine near the station. The ranger station still stands as a residence and the Torrey Pine Odo planted was, in 1957, recognized as the second largest Torrey Pine in California.
By 1919 the motion picture industry was coming into its own. European talent, displaced by the war and its aftermath, saw Hollywood as a Mecca and writers, actors, and directors came in ever increasing numbers, all of them discovering the Hollywood Bookstore sooner or later, and Odo, the bookseller and linguist came into his own. He also had bit acting parts in numerous silent films, including "Blind Husband," "Miracle Man," "World and Its Woman," and "The Right to Happiness." With training from aerial pioneer Dick Grace, Odo also became a movie stunt pilot and wing walker for Jesse Louis Lasky, defying death as he flew in WWI aerial combat scenes in Germany and America.
By 1920 French, German, Italian and Spanish books had to be added to the stock of books and it presently became necessary to move the store to larger quarters. At the sale time, Mr. Leonard purchased the Loftus Art Shop and combined it with the bookstore. Both stores grew rapidly with booming Hollywood. Greater and greater demands were made upon Odo and his staff and frequently Odo was approached by the diverse studios to assist in research. His establishment soon became known as one of the leading bookstores of the Pacific Coast, and Odo Stade the resident expert. He encouraged competition, helped Unity Peque and Jake Zeitlin to start stores of their own by giving them stock and time. He did in Hollywood what Mr. Vroman had done in Pasadena.
 1923, Odo, hitherto a confirmed bachelor, met Maria Engel, who had come that year as assistant to Howard Greer, the designer, under contract to Famous Players-Lasky Studios. It was love at first sight.
At Hickson's in New York City, Maria Engel (1894-1990) worked in the field of fashion, and became associated with Howard Greer, a dress designer. Together they did the 1922 Greenwich Village Follies, and they were engaged by Famous Players-Lasky Studios in Hollywood. They went back to another Greenwich Village Follies, 1923 Edition, and returned to Lasky's. It was during this time she first met Ziegfeld dancers Dorothy & Eleanor Deuel, which proved a valuable contact later in the 1940s when Odo and Maria built their beautifully simple, modern home in the back lot of Heinz and Dorothy Rubel's property at 861 Leadora Avenue.
One evening early in 1924, Maria went to the Hollywood Bookstore. As she reached the door, the proprietor was locking it up. However, to be accommodating, he went back in to get the book she wanted. She ordered some German books also. Odo went off to the mountains and three weeks later had the books delivered with a note, asking if he might call.
When she and Odo were first married, his uncle wanted him to return to Hungary, but Maria felt within herself that she would never be accepted by the royal family or the peasants.
Lasky gave Odo the commission in 1924 to obtain research in Hollywood and its Long Island Studios. This trip took Odo through most of the European countries and confirmed to him that his life was to be in the United States, especially since his uncle strenuously objected to his marrying a commoner. This break was never healed, Odo was cut off from his family and gladly returned to Hollywood in October 1924. A few days after his return, he married Maria Engel, who left her lucrative position with the studio to assist him by taking charge of the Hollywood Art Shop, where she achieved in a short while the same success as he did with the bookstore.
 March 1925, Frederick G. Leonard sold his interests in both stores to Maria and Odo Stade and Robert and Emma Holmes; the latter the two silent partners. That year the store had to be enlarged once more and presently a rare book section was added. By this time, the Hollywood Bookstore had become known from coast to coast. Those were busy years for Maria and Odo; the sales in both departments reached the half million mark by 1928. When in 1930 the Booksellers' Convention was held in Los Angeles, Odo was chosen Bookseller of the Pacific Coast.
The stock market debacle of 1929 was a serious set-back, but by cutting corners and careful management Odo and Maria weathered the storm. However the hoped for recovery did not come and in 1932, when economical conditions were going from bad to worse, Emma Holmes, the silent partner and majority stockholder, forced the Stades to sell their interests to her at a considerable sacrifice to them. With Odo out of the store, the Hollywood Bookstore did not outlast the change very long.
 a long rest at the Loomis Ranch, the Stade's took up residence in Topanga, where Odo began writing again, encouraged by early successes in 1919, at which time he had sold numerous short stories and epigrams to H.L. Mencken, then editor of "Smart Set Magazine." During the next ten years Odo wrote numerous short stories, novelettes, two novels and, in collaboration with Edgecumb Pinchon, the biography "Viva Villa," which was sold to the MGM Studios, and as a motion picture achieved a considerable success, being nominated for Best Picture in the Academy Awards in 1935, and earning $17 million for MGM by the late 1950s.
In 1942 Odo answered President Roosevelt's appeal for all able bodied men to do their share in the war. He applied to the U.S. Navy, but was rejected on account of the wounds sustained with Pancho Villa. Odo next applied to the U.S. Forest Service, and in 1943 was given the position of District Dispatcher, Mt. Baldy District, Angeles National Forest. He resigned from the Forest Service in 1958 after fifteen years.
During these years he was involved with several youth groups helping to "train youth to live." In 1963 he was elected "Outstanding Educator" by the students of Brown's Military Academy where he taught modern languages.
Mr. Stade was honored by the citizens of Glendora who voted him Citizen of the Year in 1956 for his outstanding contributions to all the people of the San Gabriel Valley area. He and his wife Maria also served throughout the 1950s and 60's on various committees and the San Gabriel Valley Symphony Association.
In the 1960s and 70s Odo served on the Board of Trustees of the Francis Bacon Library and Foundation. Fluent in many languages with a broad knowledge of history and literature, he translated many literary works and won a reputation as outstanding scholar.
After their marriage, Maria continued with her career in design. Her knowledge of clothes, millinery and design remained a primary interest, and she had reached a highly deserved pinnacle teaching and creating in adult education classes in Glendora where she lived through the 1980s and, in partnership with Dorothy Deuel Rubel, donated time and talent to the Citrus College drama department.
Odo was also committed to helping young people and many Glendora youths benefitted from Odo's friendship and generosity of spirit.
Odo's collection of significant first editions was donated to the library at Azusa Pacific, and is still known today as the Odo B. Stade collection.
Portman Road is an association football stadium in Ipswich, Suffolk, England.
It has been the home ground of Ipswich Town F.C. since 1884.
The stadium has also hosted a number of England youth international matches, and one senior England friendly international match, against Croatia in 2003.
It has staged several other sporting events, including athletics meetings and international hockey matches.
The stadium underwent significant redevelopments in the early 2000's, which increased the capacity from 22,600 to a current figure of 30,311, making it the largest capacity football ground in East Anglia. Each of its four stands have since been converted to all-seater, following the recommendations of the Taylor Report.
Also located at the ground are conference and banqueting facilities, the Sir Bobby Robson Suite, Legends Bar and a club store selling Ipswich Town merchandise.
Between 1878 and 1884, Ipswich Town played at two grounds in the town, Broom Hill and Brook's Hall, but in 1884, the club moved to Portman Road and have played there ever since. The ground was also used as a cricket pitch during the summer by the East Suffolk Cricket Club who had played there since 1855. The cricket club had erected a pavilion, the first fixed building at the ground. More substantial elements of ground development did not begin for a further 11 years, though Ipswich became one of the first clubs to implement the use of goal nets in 1890. At this time, Ipswich were an amateur side (the team became professional in 1936) and the first visit of a professional club came in 1892, when Preston North End played a Suffolk County Football Association team. This was followed six years later by a visit from Aston Villa, a game which was so popular that a temporary stand was erected in order to accommodate a crowd of around 5,000. In 1901, a tobacco processing plant was built along the south edge of the ground by the Churchman brothers, a name which would later become synonymous with the stand which would be located there until the early 21st century.
The first permanent stand, a wooden structure known affectionately as the "Chicken Run", was built on the Portman Road side of the ground in 1906. This structure was sold in 1971 to the local speedway team, the Ipswich Witches, who installed it at Foxhall Stadium. Two amateur internationals were held at the ground in 1910, with England winning 10–1 against Bohemia and 20–0 against France. In 1914, the ground was commandeered by the British Army for use as a training camp for the duration of the First World War. Control of Portman Road was not returned to the club until two years after the end of the war and significant work was required to repair damage to the ground caused by heavy machinery.
For a short period during the 1920s, Portman Road was host to a number of whippet races in an attempt to increase revenue, and in 1928 a small stand was built on the west side of the ground. The football club turned professional in 1936 and the cricket club were forced to move out, so work began on the first bank of terracing at the north end of the pitch. The following year, on the back of winning the Southern League, a similar terrace was built at the southern "Churchmans" end and 650 tip-up seats, bought from Arsenal, were installed. Portman Road was home to Ipswich Town's first Football League match on 27 August 1938, a 4–2 victory against Southend United in Division Three (South) witnessed by more than 19,000 spectators.
The Supporters' Association funded a number of improvements at Portman Road; in 1952, concrete terracing replaced the wooden terraces at the cost of £3,000 and another £3,000 was used to re-terrace the North Stand in 1954, bringing the capacity of the ground to approximately 29,000. In 1957, the association raised £30,500 towards the building of a new West Stand, increasing ground capacity to around 31,000. Floodlights were installed two years later; the result of £15,000 raised by the association. The floodlights were switched on by club president Lady Blanche Cobbold for the first floodlit match at the ground, a friendly against Arsenal, in February 1960.
Television cameras made their debut at Portman Road in 1962 as Anglia Television arrived for Match of the Week; it was another six years before the BBC televised a match at the ground, Match of the Day visiting Portman Road for the first time in 1968 to witness Ipswich's league fixture against Birmingham City.
Meanwhile, ground development continued with roofing enhancements to the North Stand and an increase in capacity to 31,500 by 1963. Dressing rooms were constructed in 1965 and new turnstiles were introduced two years later, including a separate entrance for juveniles at the Churchmans end. In 1968 the club agreed to a new 99-year lease on the ground with owners Ipswich Borough Council.
The two-tier propped cantilever Portman Stand was built along the east side of the ground in place of the existing terraces in 1971, providing 3,500 additional seats and increasing the capacity of the ground to approximately 37,000. Advertising appeared around the perimeter of the ground in the same year, while the following year saw the construction of the "Centre Spot" restaurant underneath the Portman Stand. Additional seating was added to the Portman Stand in 1974 and the ground saw its record attendance of 38,010 the following year in an FA Cup tie against Leeds United. Following success in the 1978 FA Cup, the club invested in 24 executive boxes in front of the Portman Stand and, as a result of the Safety of Sports Ground Act (1975), reduced the capacity in front by introducing seats, taking the overall capacity down to 34,600.
Plastic seats replaced wooden benches in the West Stand in 1980 and in the following year, the club announced a deal with electronics company Pioneer Corporation with the stand expanded at a cost of around £1.3m, renamed as the Pioneer Stand and re-opened in 1983. However, the cost of building the stand meant the club had to sell players, and led to a decline in fortunes on the pitch. Safety barriers were removed from the North Stand in 1989 following the Hillsborough disaster and following the recommendations of the Taylor Report, the terraces in both the North and South stands were also converted to all-seating. The Pioneer Stand was renamed as the Britannia Stand following a new sponsorship deal with the building society in 1999, and in the following year a statue of Sir Alf Ramsey was unveiled at the corner of Portman Road and Sir Alf Ramsey Way.
Success for Ipswich Town in promotion to the Premier League in 2000 led to further investment in the infrastructure, with the club spending around £22 million on redeveloping both the North and South stands. The complete renovation of the South Stand into a two-tier stand added 4,000 seats to the stadium. The subsequent demolition and reconstruction of a two-tier North Stand added a further 4,000 seats and brought the total capacity of the ground to more than 30,000. In 2001, local brewery Greene King took on the sponsorship of the updated South Stand and as such, the stand was renamed the Greene King stand until 2009, when the sponsorship deal ended and the name changed back to the original 'South Stand'. Following the death of former manager Bobby Robson in 2009, the club announced that the North Stand would be renamed as the Sir Bobby Robson Stand. The official unveiling took place at half time during the league match hosting Newcastle United F.C., another of Robson's former clubs, on 26 September 2009.
The pitch is surrounded by four all-seater stands, the Sir Bobby Robson Stand, the Cobbold Stand, the South Stand and the Britannia Stand. All stands are covered and are multi-tiered.
The central section of the Cobbold Stand, known originally as the Portman Stand, was built in 102 days during the close season of 1971. With two tiers and a cantilever roof, it is used to accommodate away fans, with an allocation of up to 3,000 seats per game and for family seating. It also contains a number of executive boxes as well as regular seating for home fans. The South Stand is a two-tiered stand which has a match-day capacity of approximately 7,000. It also houses the "Sir Bobby Robson Suite" restaurant and "Legends Bar". The tunnel, from which the players emerge onto the pitch from their dressing rooms, is unusually located in the corner of the stadium between the South Stand and the Britannia Stand.
The Britannia Stand was originally constructed in 1952 as a simple concrete seating area. It was updated to an all-seater stand in 1990 and currently has three tiers consisting of home fan seating and an additional family area. It also contains the directors' box, further executive boxes and the press area. Behind the stand is a full-size AstroTurf pitch which is often used on a casual basis by fans before home games. The Sir Bobby Robson Stand was completely rebuilt in 2001 and has a capacity of around 7,500. It is a two-tier cantilever stand which is divided into an adults-only lower tier "...traditionally for the 'hard core' Town fan..." and a mixed upper tier.
There are nine areas throughout the ground designated for disabled supporters, in the lower Britannia Stand, the Greene King Stand and the Sir Bobby Robson Stand. These provide over 300 spaces to accommodate wheelchair users and ambulant disabled, together with their carers. The ground also provides 12 seats in the Britannia Stand for visually impaired spectators with commentary via individual radio headsets in each seat, provided by local radio station BBC Radio Suffolk.
The current groundsman, Alan Ferguson, has received a number of accolades, including both Premiership and Championship Groundsman of the Year, and the pitch was voted the best in the Championship for two consecutive seasons in 2004 and 2005.
There are statues of Sir Alf Ramsey and Sir Bobby Robson, both former Ipswich Town and England managers, outside the ground. Nearby Portman's Walk was renamed Sir Alf Ramsey Way in 1999.
On 20 August 2003, Portman Road hosted its first and thus far only senior England fixture, a friendly against Croatia, the match finishing 3–1 to England in front of 28,700 spectators. The stadium has been used by England youth teams on a number of occasions, the first on 24 November 1971, saw the England U23 team draw 1–1 with Switzerland. Most recently, England U21s played a UEFA European U21 Championship qualifying match there on 18 August 2006 against Moldova, in front of 13,556 spectators. In addition, a variety of other sports have been hosted at Portman Road, including athletics in 1927, an American football match in 1953, and several international hockey matches in the 1960s and 70s.
The stadium has also hosted several music concerts, including performances by Elton John, R.E.M., Red Hot Chili Peppers, P!nk, Neil Diamond, Tina Turner, Dire Straits, Dirty Pretty Things & Rod Stewart, among others.
In March 2005, around 8,000 Christians attended a gathering at the stadium, the largest act of Christian worship in Suffolk, since American evangelist Billy Graham used Portman Road on part of his Mission England Tour in 1984.
The highest attendance recorded at Portman Road is 38,010 for a match against Leeds United in the FA Cup sixth round on 8 March 1975.
The record modern (all-seated) attendance is 30,152, set on 21 December 2003 against local rivals Norwich City in the Football League Championship.
The largest ever crowd for a non-competitive game at the ground was 23,284 for Bobby Robson's testimonial where Ipswich, including George Best, played against an England XI.
The highest seasonal average at the stadium since Ipswich turned professional was 26,431 in the 1976–77 season while Ipswich were playing in the First Division.
The lowest average attendance at Portman Road was 8,741 in the club's inaugural league season, the 1936–37 season in Division Three (South).
The highest total seasonal attendance was recorded during the 1980–81 season when the aggregate was more than 814,000 during a season in which Ipswich won the UEFA Cup and finished second in the First Division.
Portman Road hosted Ipswich Town's first appearance in European football competition when they defeated Floriana of Malta 10–0, still a club record, in the European Cup in 1962. Since then, Ipswich Town remain undefeated at Portman Road in all European competitions, a total of 31 matches spanning 40 years, a record until it was surpassed by AZ Alkmaar in December 2007.
The stadium is approximately from Ipswich railway station, which lies on the Great Eastern Main Line from London Liverpool Street to Norwich. The stadium has no parking facilities for supporters, and the streets around the ground are subject to a residents-only permit parking scheme, but there are a number of pay and display or park and ride car parks within a short distance of the ground.
Ricardo Letts Colmenares (Lima, August 9, 1937) is a left-wing Peruvian politician.
His parents were Roberto Letts Sánchez, an agricultural businessman and Josefina Colmenares Castro, a housewife devoted to her family. He was the fourth of nine children.
Ricardo Letts studied elementary education at Villa María and Inmaculado Corazón school, and high school at Santa María school. He did further education at the Escuela Nacional de Agricultura de La Molina – ENA (National School of Agriculture). In 1959, he finished his career of agronomy and started working as manager at the Companía Agrícola La Mina (La Mina Agricultural Company), Sayán (1960–1962). In 1963, he obtained his professional degree as Agricultural Engineer with his thesis “Economic and Political Justification of the Peruvian Agrarian Reform”.
Between years 1956 and 1959, Ricardo Letts was student leader at the ENA. In 1959, he was elected President of the Student Union and participated as leader in the student and teachers movement of the ENA which made the director renounce in 1958, initiating a reform in the ENA in 1959.
In 1961, Letts joined the Acción Popular party and was head of the Chancay Provincial Committee of Acción Popular, he participated in the III National Congress of Acción Popular held in Iquitos. He met Fernando Belaúnde Terry during the trip travelling to Iquitos. Between 1962 and 1963, he worked in the Agrarian Reform and Colonization Institute as a researcher, elaborating the preliminary report about the Land Tenure Situation in Peru. He was elected National Secretary of Peasant Affairs of Acción Popular. Months later, Letts was elected National Chief of the Youth Command of Acción Popular. In 1963, he started working for the Cooperación Popular (Popular Cooperation) . In 1964, he was promoted as Secretary General of Cooperación Popular, but in February and April 1965, in the midst of a serious political conflict, he renounced Acción Popular and Cooperación Popular. In April of the same year he married María Luisa Raygada.
On May 30, 1965, Ricardo Letts founded Vanguardia Revolucionaria together with Ricardo Napurí , Edmundo Murrugarra , Efraín Franco, Antonio Lobato and others. In August of the same year, Letts was arrested and accused of collaborating with the Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria – MIR (Revolutionary Left Movement) and Ejército de Liberación Nacional del Perú- ELN (National Liberation Army) Ejército de Liberación Nacional guerrilla movement. He was set free and in February 1966 travelled to Paris as an exile. He contacted Cuba and went through a training program in the so called Guerrilla School in Cuba (1966–1967) of military guerrilla groups for the revolutionary struggle in Peru. Letts also passed postgraduate studies in Marxim and also on Socialist Economy in the Practical School of Advanced Studies of the Paris University - Sorbonne (1966–1968). He was elected Secretary General of Vanguardia Revolucionaria in the II Congress in 1968.
Ricardo Letts was consultant for the Confederación Campesina del Perú – CCP (Peasant Confederation of Peru) (1962–1977). Since 1995 he became a member of the Consultative Council. He was also president of the Consejo Unitario Nacional Agrario - CUNA (National Unitary Agrarian Council), (1985–1990). On behalf of the CCP, Letts was president of the Popular National Assembly (1987–1990). Nowadays, he is the Chief Executive Officer of the agricultural company Huerto Alamein SAC, (since 1981). He is also president of the Asociación Nacional de Productores y Exportadores de Aceituna Peruana - ANPEAP (National Association of Producers and Exporters of Peruvian Olives) (since 1997). Secretary of the Convención Nacional del Agro Peruano (Agro Peruvian National Convention) (1998–2002).
In journalism, Ricardo Letts has been editor and deputy editor of the weekly political news magazine “Marka” in Lima, (1975–1978). Editor of the weekly political news magazine “Zurda” in Lima, (1978–1980). Editor of the political daily “El diario de Marka” in Lima, (1983–1984).
Letts also did other postgraduate studies in the Escuela Superior de Administración de Negocios - ESAN (1995–1996), where he graduated with his thesis “Investment Project: Ecolgical Firewood”.
Ricardo Letts published the following books: “La Reforma Agraria Peruana” (“The Peruvian Agrarian Reform”) (1961); “Justificación económica y política de la reforma agraria peruana“ (“Economic and Political Justification of the Peruvian Agrarian Reform”) (1963); “Perú, Revolución, Insurrección, Guerrillas” (“Perú, Revolution, Insurrection, Guerrilla”) (Paris, 1966); “Perú: El mito de la revolución militar” (“Peru: The Military Revolution Myth”) (Caracas, 1970); “Pérou: Révolution socialiste ou Caricature de révolution” – “Perú: Revolución Socialista o Caricatura de Revolución” (“Perú: Socialist Revolution or Caricature of Revolution” (Paris, 1971); and “La Izquierda Peruana: Organizaciones y Tendencias” (“The Peruvian Left: Organizations and Tendencies”) (Lima, 1981).
With regard to his political activity, Letts started working in the Fernando Belaúnde Terry’s candidature (1956). After that, he was president of the Agricultural Student Union of the La Molina National School of Agriculture (1959). Became a member leader of Acción Popular (1961–1965). In 1965, he left Belaunde’s party and founded Vanguardia Revolucionaria (VR), an emblematic party of the new left-wing in the 60’s, which remained until 1984. On that date Vanguardia Revolucionaria joined both the MIR and the Partido Comunista Revolucionario – PCR (Revolutionary Communist Party) to form the Partido Unificado Mariateguista – PUM (Mariateguist Unified Party). In 1970, being SG of VR he was arrested and deported to Colombia when he was going to a public debate in a university round table. In 1974 he was arrested again after an intense activity supportig the peasant trade union organization and the land taking movement in Andahuaylas. Letts took part of the National Unitary Command of Struggle in the strike of July 17, 1977 , and also in the leading committee of the National Strike of May 23 and 24, 1978 . He was arrested in May, some days before the 2nd national strike. He was deported and given up to the Argentinian army in the barracks of Jujuy together with 12 Peruvian leaders. In 1990, Letts was elected to the National Congress as deputy of Lima for the Izquierda Unida (United Left) party. He held this position until the closure of congress in 1992. There, along with Lourdes Flores and Fernando Olivera, leaded the triumphant constitutional charge for illicit enrichment against Alan García Pérez. Also, he leaded the interpellation and censure of the Ministry of Agriculture Enrique Ross Link. He was one of the founders and leaders of the PUM (1984–1995). When Javier Diez Canseco proposed dissolving the PUM, he renounced at the same time that he was reaffirming his socialist and mariateguist principles in 1996.
The 1970 deportation was a plot to murder him in flight from Panamá to Barranquilla. In October 16, 1991 Ricardo Letts received a “letter bomb” with the purpose of murdering him. This letter bomb was detected by his assistants and exploded when the UDEX (The Unit for Desactivation of Explosives) tried to deactivate it. The same date and hour that General Rodolfo Robles , who had denounced the Cantuta (12) assassinations, Letts was fired a missile at his olive orchard in Paracas. No body was hurt.
Ricardo Letts traveled to France invited by the National Assembly. He also traveled to the USA invited by the Department of the State, to China invited by the Chinese PC Central Committee and to Cuba several times, between 1961 and 1994.
In 1998, Ricardo Letts together with Raúl Wiener, Delfina Paredes and others, founded the Comité Malpica – CM (Malpica Committee), a revolutionary political organization, whose name was adopted in memory of Carlos Malpica Silva Santisteban , a great fighter in favor of the people and the Peruvian nation. Letts and the CM and the Popular Assembly of the San Martin Square participated in the Marcha de los Cuatro Suyos (Four Suyos March) and in the Popular Rebellion of Lima against the Fujimori regime , in July 28, 2000. He supported in public the idea of firing the National Jury of Elections building which was considered responsible for the election fraud. In February 2001, on behalf of CM, Letts accused Alan García Pérez to the prosecutor on duty for the prison massacre and genocides of June 18 and 19, 1986. Between 2004 and 2005, he and the CM participated in the Movimiento del Frente Amplio - FA (Foundation Movement Broad Front) also conformed by the Movimiento Nueva Izquierda – MNI (New Left Movement), Partido Comunista del Perú – Patria Roja PCP(PR)(Communist Party of Peru - Red Fatherland), Partido Comunista del Perú – PCP (Peruvian Communist Party), Partido Socialista Revolucionario – PSR (Revolutionary Socialist Party), Frente Popular – FP (Popular Front), Frente Obrero Campesino del Perú – FOCEP (Peasant Labor Front of Peru), Movimiento Democrático Pueblo Unido – MDPU Democratic (Movement United People), and Partido Nacionalista de las Comunidades Andinas – PANACA (Nationalist Party of the Andean Comunities). He left the FA since it refused to support the Ollanta Humala (OHT)’s presidential candidature. Then, he leaded the CM to support OHT in the 1st and 2nd elections.
María Luisa Raygada, his first wife, died on February 8, 1977. They both, had an only child named Rafael Alejandro Letts Raygada. He married Margarita Benavídes Matarazzo in June 23, 1979. Livia Ianesha Letts Benavídes, their only daughter, was born in May 21, 1982.
In October 17, 2007, after 26 years of work, Ricardo Letts stopped being an olive producer. He also left the management of the ANPEAP and Convención Nacional del Agro Peruano – CONVEAGRO (National Convention of the Peruvian Agriculture), in order to spend all his time in the political struggle from the CM direction.

Sadok Chaabane, who was born on 23 February 1950, is a University Professor, holding the prestigious Agrégation degree in Public Law and Political Science. In addition to this academic position, he has held numerous ministerial and political portfolios. 
He was born and raised in Sfax, a city on the eastern coastline of Tunisia. As a youngster he was fond of hunting and football games.
His family background was modest; his father was a small farmer and his mother, Habiba Maalej, comes from a family with somewhat more means. 
He began his primary education at Al-Amal school in the year of Tunisia’s independence, 1956, then went on to secondary schooling at 15- November lycée. He obtained the baccalauréat degree at the age of 17 with the highest distinction, President Habib Bourguiba Prize, awarded on 30 June 1967. On that occasion a family member extended the material help needed to travel to the capital to collect the award.
Despite advice to follow scientific disciplines at the University, he preferred to pursue legal studies. 
He enrolled at Tunis Faculty Law (University Campus) in October 1967 and obtained his BA in Public Law in June 1971 as well as the Higher Diploma in Political Science in 1972 and the Higher Diploma in Public Law in 1973.
The Dean selected him for a teaching assistantship position in October 1972, when he was yet 22 years of age, and above all urged him particularly to prepare the Doctorat d’Etat.
On 15 December 1975, at 25, he received his Doctorat d’Etat in Public Law and Political Science. 
It was the first degree of its kind to have been awarded by Tunis University; and the dissertation debates were attended by the Minister of Education and many political personalities and scholars both from Tunisia and France.
 In the meanwhile he married on 10 August 1974 Dalenda Nouri, a fine arts student who comes from a wealthy business and landed family. Among her ancestry she counts the holy man Ali Nouri (1644–1706), a religious scholar who studied in Cairo and returned to Tunisia to teach and work as a weaver. He built a fleet to fight the Maltese Knights and left about ten works. 
He has three children: Iskander, born on 17 April 1976, a specialist doctor of medicine, teaching at Tunis Medical School; Sirine, born on 1 January 1980, a lawyer; and Yasmine, currently studying medicine at Tunis Medical School.
He rose to the position of agrégé professor in 1980. He taught various law and political science disciplines, mainly constitutional law, political sociology, international law, administrative law, and methodology.
As the head of a research group he has since 1976 directed and supervised theses and dissertations in the National School of Administration where he also taught up to 1986. He thus wrote contributions to many publications on Tunisian administration and municipal organization. For in addition to studying law at the Tunis Faculty of Law, he enrolled from 1969 to 1971in the National School of Administration from which he also graduated.
 1974 he joined the bar and became active both in court litigation and arbitration, but he preferred to vacate his position for the reason it became increasingly difficult for him to reconcile its demands with academic obligations. 
When the League of Arab Nations moved its headquarters in 1979 in Tunis, he was called upon to revamp its bylaws and in that capacity has contributed many legal opinions on the subject. 
He thus attended the many summits and meetings convened by the League of Arab Nations until the conclusion of his consultancy period in 1987. During this time he put forward many legal opinions to Special Arab Organizations. Also, it was during this period that he issued a book entitled International Organizations Law, published in 1985 by Tunis University Press.
During his boyhood he was active in the Boy scouts and its summer camps; as he was also active in the Socialist Destour Party, though he never held any official position. Yet as an academic he took part in the Party’s many political training programs.
He was involved in associative life, and as a member in the Menzah branch of the Tunisia League of Human Rights, he gave numerous lectures on political and legal themes.
Moreover, he taught in many universities, namely in Syracuse (Italy), Nice, Aix en Provence and Strasbourg (France), Ben Aknoune (Algeria), and others.
He also took part in numerous international symposia organized by the United Nations and the UNRWA.
He attended Harvard University Summer seminar in Salzburg (Austria), and was selected to tour the USA as part of the Young African Leaders program.
He never held a government post before 1987.
He admired Zine Al Abidine Ben Ali since his appointment by Bourguiba in 1986 as Minister of the Interior. He told then many of his academic friends who were political scientists and economists that Zine Al Abidine Ben Ali has now become the man of the moment, and that he would in due course become the head of state, which happened indeed one year later. 
When Zine Al Abidine Ben Ali became President of the Republic, he was full of hopefulness and decided to enter the political arena to fully participate in the change.
He took part in organizing the Party’s Salvation Congress, the first to be held after the Political Change of 1987, at the conclusion of which he became the Party’s Permanent Secretary on 2 August 1988. He was profoundly impressed by President Zine Al Abidine Ben Ali during his first encounter with him, a mere few weeks after acceding to his party position, and ever since he has become a fervent admirer of the President and his ideas. 
On 11 April 1989 he joined the Government for the first time, at the age of 39. He was appointed Secretary of State in charge of Higher Education and Scientific Research. Hedi Baccouche was then Prime Minister. 
From then on he held several posts, in addition to his being designated by President Ben Ali on many sensitive missions. 
On 15 September 1990 he was called up by President Zine Al Abidine Ben Ali to be his Political Advisor; and on 20 February he was entrusted with the “Scientific Dossier” as Secretary of State to the Prime Minister Hamed Karoui. In this post he remained only four months when President Zine Al Abidine Ben Ali recalled him to his Cabinet to serve as his Advisor on Human Rights. It is while serving in this position that he discovered President Ben Ali strategic thinking and his humanist sensibility as well as his astonishing political acumen. 
On 9 June 1992 he became Minister of Justice where he served for five years, that is, until 20 June 1997. During this period he was nominated as a member of the Democratic Constitutional Rally’s Political Bureau. Also, while serving as Minister of Justice he wrote one of his most important political works, entitled: Ben Ali and the Way to Multiparty Politics, published in 1995 by Ceres in Tunis. The book was translated into French, English and Russian.
Between 22 February and 12 November 1999 he headed the Tunisian Institute for Strategic Study by appointment of President Ben Ali; the Institute being directly connected with the Presidency of the Republic. In this post he became acutely aware of the events and phenomena one is likely to fail to notice when one is a member of the Cabinet, and he also caught up with what was going on the international scene. He paid particular attention to the comparative approach and to strategic thinking. He made full use of the Internet to appraise the major challenges of the age and to ascertain the best practices. 
As the head of the Tunisian Institute for Strategic Study he supervised many studies and published two more books: Hannibal Redux (1997) and The End of Geography and the Return of History (1998), which were both translated into French and English. In the latter work he disputes the ideas prevalent in the West that predict the final victory of liberalism or the end of history. He warned against one-sided triumphalism and declared the “return of history” albeit the “end of geography”, by which he meant widening globalization and the fast erasure of boundaries. 
On 1 July 1999 President Zine Al Abidine Ben Ali designated him to supervise his election campaign, which was a very significant experience for him. 
After the presidential campaign, on 17 November 1999, President Zine Al Abidine Ben Ali appointed him to one of the most important portfolios, Higher Education, under the Premiership of Mohamed Ghannouchi; on 4 September 2002, the department of Scientific Research was added to the Ministry, and the President of the Republic appointed him again to the Democratic Constitutional Rally’s Political Bureau. 
On 11 November 2004 he left the Government, like many of his colleagues, and was given once again the directorship of the Tunisian Institute of Strategic Study, wherein he greatly appreciated to carry out research. He remained in the Institute up to 22 March 2007. During this period, he undertook many important prospective studies, such as “Tunisia in 2030”, which he envisaged all over again, “Another Future for the Sahara”, and others on Tunisia’s economic incentives, the export of medical and health services, and so on. 
Moreover, it was during this period that he published a new democratic theory that greatly drew the attention of political analysts, From Faith Democracy to Program Democracy (Maison Arabe du Livre, Tunis: 2005); in this work, which was translated into French and English, he argued that democracy in Islamic and Arab countries will face obstacles as long as it does not go beyond faith conflicts to reach program contests and deal with the concrete issues that citizens contend with in their lives. 
He wrote another book that encapsulates his knowledge and experience of political life over 30 years; the work, which is entitled Tunisian Political System (Maison Arabe du Livre, Tunis: 2006), was translated into French. 
On 22 March 2007 he was appointed to the chairmanship of the Social and Economic Council, which is a constitutional body representing civil society with a consultative role on legislation proposals. 
Among the many additional responsibilities held by Professor Sadok Chaabane, one may cite organizing the Dialogue with Youth throughout the year 2008. President Ben Ali entrusted him with this mission, which brought together over 400 000 young participants in the dialogue, and over 2 million young signatories of the Charter of Tunisian Youth. 
 The proceedings of the dialogue may be consulted on the website: www.pactejeunesse.tn
And the works and writings of Professor Sadok Chaabane, on Google research: sadok.chaabane e-books or www.uvt.rnu.tn/livres/index-eng2.htm

Sadok Chaabane is an admirer of Tunisian history. In most of his lectures he is concerned with making connections between the present and the course of history. He, in this regard, supervised the preparation of the three volumes entitled Tunisia through History, in 2007. With Professor Hassine Fantar and others he founded the Hannibal Club (1993), and endeavored to create branches in other countries for the reason these clubs are aim at promoting friendship, such as Hannibal Club-USA, and Hannibal Club-Japan. 
He was also a founding member of a number of legal and political societies; hence he is the founder and chair of Tunisian Political Science Society.
Mr Sadok Chaabane was awarded the “Highest Honor of the 7th of November” and distinguished with the “Medal of the Republic”.

Satish Chandra Mukherjee (June 5, 1865 - April 18, 1948) was a pioneer in establishing a system of national education in India, along with Sri Aurobindo.
Satish Chandra was born at Banipur in the Hooghly district, near Kolkata (Calcutta). His father, Krishnanath Mukherjee, had been a childhood friend and classmate of Justice Dvarkanath Mitra, who appointed him as a translator of official documents in the Calcutta High Court. Mitra was a leading believer in the Religion of Humanity as founded by the Positivist Auguste Comte. Adept of this faith, an atheist servant of Man and of society, Krishnanath impressed this ideology on his sons, Tinkori and Satish. Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay himself was not only one of the first in India to write on Comte and his philosophy but, also, he had zealous Positivist friends like Yogendrachandra Ghose and Rajkrishna Mukherjee; in 1874, Bankim published the latter’s article on Positivism in his Bangadarshan, which began with the sentence, "Among the successfully educated classes of our country, there is a great deal of animation concerning the philosophy of Comte." While writing on psychological purification, Bankim wrote: "He who has been psychologically purified is the best Hindu, the best Christian, the best Buddhist, the best Muslim, the best Positivist."
In 1884, in the preface of his novel Devi Chaudhurani, Bankim quoted from the Catechism of Positive Religion: "The general law of Man’s progress (…) consists in this that Man becomes more and more religious."
As a student of the South Suburban School in Bhowanipore in Kolkata, Satish Chandra received inspiration from Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar and would have a wide range of acquaintances like Ashvinikumar Datta, Sivanath Sastri, Bipin Chandra Pal, Brojendranath Seal, Ashutosh Mukherjee (his class-friend), Rabindranath Tagore, Sri Aurobindo, Raja Subodh Mullick. With his classmate Narendra Datta (Swami Vivekananda) and his friend Kaliprasad Chandra (Swami Abhedananda), he attended the lectures by Pandit Sashadhar Tarka Chudamani on the shaD-darshana ("six schools of Hindu philosophy") at the Albert Hall, presided over by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay. "Alive to the necessity and the usefulness of all other systems, secular or religious, Eastern or Western," Satish Chandra’s intense religious temperament laid emphasis on the study of Hindu life, thought and faith. He joined the Presidency College to obtained his M.A. in 1886 and B.L. in 1890, and enrolled himself as a pleader of the Calcutta High Court. In 1887, he was appointed a Lecturer in history and economics in the Berhampore College. In 1895 he founded the Bhagavat Chatuspathi, a first attempt to an alternate system of higher studies.
Founder-editor of the Dawn magazine (1897-1913), an organ of Indian Nationalism, in 1902 he organised the "Dawn Society" of culture, to protest against the Report of the Indian Universities Commission, representing the inadequate university education imposed by the Government to fabricate clerks for the merchant offices. "The cry for thorough overhauling of the whole system of University education was in the air."
Dawn occupied an apartment on the first floor of the present Vidyasagar College (formerly known as the Metropolitan Institution: its Principal, Nagendranath Ghosh was the President, and Satish its General Secretary). The Dawn Society was "functioning (…) as a training ground of youths and a nursery of patriotism, became in 1905 one of the most active centres for the propagation of Boycott-Swadeshi ideologies..."
In tune with the programme of a new pedagogy introduced by Sri Aurobindo, the Society’s object was to draw the attention of the students to the needs of the country, to love Mother India, to cultivate their moral character, to inspire original thinking. It had a weekly session for a “general training course”. One of the members, Benoy Kumar Sarkar, considering having lived significantly thanks to Satish Chandra’s influence, would remember his ardent message of patriotism and philanthropy rousing the youth to dedicated service; he would also write about the method of Pandit Nilakantha Goswami’s explaining the Bhagavad Gita, impressing on the listeners’ mind the futility of life and death, the insignificance of the body: the sole thing that counts is Duty, the right Action.
Among active members of the "Dawn" were Sister Nivedita, Bagha Jatin (Jatin Mukherjee), Rajendra Prasad (first President of India), Haran Chakladar, Radhakumud Mukherjee, Kishorimohan Gupta (principal, Daulatpur College), Atulya Chatterjee, Rabindra Narayan Ghosh, Benoykumar Sarkar, all future celebrities. One day, Satish Chandra heard an inner voice uttering firmly: "God exists."
The Positivist awaited further light from within. In September, a friend of his, follower of the saint Bejoykrishna Goswami, told him that the Master wanted him to come. After receiving initiation in September 1893, he learnt from the saint that on completing his present activities, Satish was to leave for Varanasi (Benares) for his spiritual pursuit.
By the side of Subodh Chandra Mullick, in 1906, Satish took a leading part in forming the Council of National Education and became a lecturer in the Bengal National College. In 1907, after Sri Aurobindo’s resignation on 2 August 1907 (fearing "that he might be spirited away to prison at any moment, and his association with the National College might cause great damage to the institution"), Satish Chandra succeeded him as principal, and a contributor to the daily Bande Mataram. Four years after Sri Aurobindo’s retiring to Pondicherry, Satish left for Varanasi in 1914, settled there till his death. Prominent among the regular visitors who consulted him for guidance, there was Malani, Professor of English at the Hindu University, who took profuse notes while listening to Satish Chandra. There were also Madan Mohan Malaviya, Narendra Deva, Jadunath Sarkar.
Another professor of the same university, Jivatram Kripalani, introduced him to Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, who held Satish Chandra so high that whenever Gandhi went to Varanasi, he spent some time with Satish Chandra. At a juncture, it seems Gandhi even approached him for receiving initiation; but Satish Chandra did not feel that Gandhi needed it. Both of them were seekers of God. Gandhi strove to solve the problem of suffering in man’s daily life and look for the Truth; Satish Chandra sought after spiritual deliverance.
Following Gandhi’s arrest in 1922, he spent two months at the Sabarmati Ashram helping in the management and publication of Young India. Those were years when Gandhi had been moving all over India, without caring for his failing health. One day Satish Chandra was asked by his Guru Bejoykrishna to send Gandhi one hundred rupees every month for his personal use. Gratefully Gandhi accepted this gift. In 1924, hospitalized for appendicitis, whereas Gandhi was flooded with messages of solicitude, he wondered about Satish Chandra’s silence and wanted his son Devdas to enquire. The only reply that came was that Satish Chandra knew that Gandhi was going to recover soon.
In the habit of exchanging letters regularly, the last time Satish Chandra wrote to Gandhi was on 24 January 1947, explaining how to repeat the name of Rama with a breath control; happy with that instruction, on 1 February, Gandhi thanked Satish Chandra for "Your lovely letter": on 30 January 1948, Gandhi breathed his last by repeating He Rama.
Satish Chandra died on 18 April 1948.
Satpula is a remarkable ancient water harvesting dam or weir located about east of the Khirki Masjid that is integral to the compound wall of the medieval fourth city of the Jahanpanah in Delhi, with its construction credited to the reign of Sultan Muhammad Shah Tughlaq (Muhammad bin Tughluq) (1325–1351) of the Tughlaq Dynasty.
The objective of building the weir was for providing water for irrigation and also, as a part of the city wall, to provide defense security to the city against attacking armies..
Satpula is a usage in Urdu and Hindi languages, which literally means “seven bridges”.
During the second decade rule of Sultan Muhammad Shah Tughlaq, the economic conditions of the Delhi Sultanate was in distress due to very high expenses incurred on the war campaign in South India (Deccan) and also due to the Sultan establishing his southern capital at Daulatabad. Both these acts necessitated increasing taxes to enhance the treasury coffers to meet large expenses. But people were dissatisfied and distressed with these developments. Some tribal groups, such as the Chaghatai tribes, had rebelled, launched raids on many places in North India and even posed serious threats to Delhi, when the Sultan was on his south Indian campaign. In the period between 1334 and 1344, repeated droughts had caused famines that were further compounded by the Black Plague. These two natural calamities had added to the suffering of the people in the country. Urgent solutions had to be found to remedy the distress conditions. One of the viable options planned was of building the Satpula, the seven arches bridge or gate controlled weir/dam, to tap the water resources of the local nallah (stream) feeding the Yamuna river, which could be used to bring large areas of flat land in the vicinity under controlled irrigated agriculture to grow food crops to stem the famine conditions. This solution was also thought to provide the much needed defense to the walls of the newly built city of Jahanpanah. 
The location of the Satpula, which is a part of the east–west wall protecting the southern part of Jahanpanah, drains a catchment comprising a series of low hills on the south, east, and west. The stream draining the catchment area, known as Barapulla Nallah was planned to be tapped to store the run–off water of the catchment. Command area for irrigation was identified in a large open plain on the northern side for providing water supplies from the proposed storage behind the Satpula, to grow irrigated crops to sustain a large population. 
Thus, a reliable water storage reservoir in the arid region of Delhi, which has the Thar desert on its west, was built as the headworks or weir across the Barapulla Nallah. Even though no epigraphic evidence is available to date the Satpula, a reasseacrh study report has conjectured that it could be dated to the same time as the four–eyyan Mosque (first of its kind in India) called Jami built by Muhammad bin Tughluq in 1343.
The Satpula across the stream was built as a gate controlled weir. The total length of the structure is . It has been constructed in stone masonry. The eleven bays of the weir controlled by sluice gates cover a total length of . These eleven bays consist of eleven water tunnels (sluices), each in length, in height, and in width. These are located at different levels, with seven main bays at the lowest level. The balance two additional bays on each bank, on the far east and west sides, are at a higher level. The control arrangements seen now are in the form of gate grooves to operate vertical slide gates. When built, wooden vertical sluice gates made of heavy boards of size in thickness, width, and more than in height, were operated by a rope and pulley arrangement to control flow of water; the wooden gates have since disintegrated but the gate groves are visible in each bay. The gates of the sluices were closed as a defensive measure against possible attack in the dry season when no storage remained in the dam. Each bay of the weir has an arched opening. On both banks of the weir identical towers (defensive bastions, projecting on the south and north sides) of ) diameter, but with octagonal shape chambers, are built, which once functioned as madrasa (Islamic school of learning). Hence, the Satpula is also known as "Madarsa". The second level sluice bays on both banks lead to arched corridors. The walls of the octagonal chambers have graceful decorations. The stream tapped by this weir, has been diverted now further east. The indication of the use of the sluices of the structure, either as a dam or for defense purposes, could be gauged from the platforms provided at the appropriate levels. Silt deposition in the storage area of the reservoir side at the southern end is also seen now.
The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) has recently carried out restoration works of the Satpula. This restoration now permits access to the wide parapet of the bridge to fully view the impressive engineering structure. The restoration works carried out by ASI, for specially identified monuments, is in sync with the slogan ‘Welcome to Historical City of Delhi’ adopted by the Commonwealth Secretariat for the 2010 Common Wealth Games to be held in Delhi. The restoration works of the Satpula is at an estimated cost of Rs 20 lakhs (US $ 40,000) for conservation of the monument to highlight its structural elegance by improving its overall view, enhancing environmental aesthetics and its illumination.
Satpula is located about east of Khirki Masjid. It is close to the present city suburb of Saket on the Press Enclave Road. In the medieval period, it connected four principal cities namely, the Qila Rai Pithora (the first city of Delhi – Lal Kot or Qutub complex), Siri (with the Siri Fort forming the second city of Delhi), Tughlaqabad (the third city of Delhi) and Jahanpanah (the fourth city of Delhi, the boundary limits of which encompassed the other earlier built three cities).. It is locally believed that the waters stored by the weir had healing powers because the sufi saint Nasiru'd-Din Mahmud is reported to have used the waters of this reservoir for daily oblations before offering prayers at the Mosque.
The Shadow Riders, known as the in the original Japanese language version, are a fictional group of villains in the Yu-Gi-Oh! GX anime series, appearing between episodes 29-49. 
Composed of seven duelists and their leader of varying origins and backgrounds who each have their own agendas, the Shadow Riders serve as the main antagonists of the series' first season, intent on resurrecting the Sacred Beasts.
However, one of them returns in the fourth and final season as the true mastermind behind the mysterious attacks that take place in Duel Academy and Domino City.

The Shadow Riders' character designs were overseen by Kenichi Hara. An example of one of these concepts can be seen in Nightshroud, who wears a tight-fitting overcoat with raised shoulders and waistline and gold and green trimmings. His dark dragon mask, similar to that worn by his signature monster Red-Eyes Darkness Dragon, is completely black with the exception of blue eye-pieces and a red stone in the center of the forehead. In this incarnation, the bangs closest to his face are positioned in front of the mask. He carries and Academy-issued Duel Disk on his left hand.
Another example can be seen in Amnael, who wears a hooded tunic with a flowing red scarf, boots, and a mask with yellow eye-pieces. On his right hand is a glove made of heavier material, and he carries a black model of the Academy-issued Duel Disk on his left despite the second Japanese opening sequence featuring his alter ego with the standard Disk given to all students and staff before his official debut as Amnael. In this incarnation, he has white hair, and the sides of his face are covered in pronounced veins and cracks.
In the timeline of the Yu-Gi-Oh! GX anime, enlisted by the elderly Kagemaru in his quest to retrieve his lost youth, the Shadow Riders are a collection of elite duelists who work towards the goal of reviving the Sacred Beast Cards. Each of the members that Jaden Yuki and company face possess a "Shadow Charm," similar to the Millennium Items in terms of supernatural power, but of unknown origin. These relics bestow upon their owners different abilities depending on the Shadow Rider in question.
In the past, Kagemaru was forced to seal the Sacred Beasts away behind the Spirit Gate underneath Duel Academy due to their inability to grant his wish at that time. In order to access their true abilities, he bestows upon Chancellor Sheppard the seven Spirit Keys capable of unlocking the gate, and pits his subordinates against the school's finest to create the strong dueling presence needed to unleash the Sacred Beasts.
 is the leader of the Shadow Riders and former superintendent of Duel Academy. The "Kage" portion of his name is derived from the Japanese word "kage" (影), meaning "shadow". In the English version, Kagemaru is voiced by David Wills (older) and Marc Thompson (younger), while Mugihito (older) and Nobutoshi Canna (younger) take the role in the Japanese version.
In horrible health, Kagemaru hoped to attain eternal youth by sacrificing Duel Monster spirits to the Sacred Beasts. During his Duel with Jaden, his youth gradually returned. After being defeated, however, he returned to his aged state. He then asked forgiveness and promised to renounce his former ways, carried off to the hospital by helicopter. He appears again as his younger self in episode 84.
Kagemaru plays a Sacred Beast deck. He carries a basic Fiend deck to support Raviel, and plenty of Spell and Trap Cards to support Uria and Hamon.
Nightshroud, known as in the original Japanese language version, is the first Shadow Rider. But in reality, Nightshroud is an entity of unknown origin tied to the darkness itself and the final antagonist in the series. He entered the body of Atticus Rhodes and took control. Nightshroud is voiced by Hozumi Gōda in the Japanese version. While possessing Atticus' body, Nightshroud is voiced by Jason Anthony Griffith in the English version, while Kouji Yusa takes the role in the Japanese version.
Being the owner of the other half of the Shadow Charm pendant in Jaden's possession, Nightshroud sets a Shadow Game for both of them where the loser has his soul sealed in a card. When defeated, Nightshroud's soul (represented by his mask) is sealed away, and Atticus is freed.
During the GX Tournament, Atticus uses Nightshroud's deck in hopes of convincing his friend, Zane Truesdale, that the dark path taken by a duelist is a terrible course. As a result, Nightshroud's influence (that laid dormant within his cards) is once again able to take control of Atticus, only to be banished following his defeat.
In the fourth season, Atticus again uses Nightshroud's deck to duel Jaden, revealing he still has nightmares about his alter-ego. During the duel, Atticus remembers that one of the missing students at the academy, Yusuke Fujiwara, was the original host of Nightshroud and before he vanished, he made Atticus into a temporary host for Nightshroud to inhabit. But Nightshroud eventually returns in the body of Fujiwara, and though he loses to Atticus in a one-on-one duel, he cheats reversing time and preventing Atticus from playing Red-Eyes Burn. But after losing to Jaden when he and Jesse double teamed Fujiwara, Nightshroud left his vessel and duels Jaden in a match with the world at stake. Jaden reverses all of Nightshroud's evil doings and finally destroys him. Though beaten, Nightshroud boasts that as long there's darkness in humans, he would return, but Jaden counters by claiming that as long as there are bonds between humans, Nightshroud won't return. In his final duel, Nightshroud is portrayed as megalomaniac or simply insane, once he claims he is God and the Savior.
Nightshroud, while possessing Atticus, plays a Red-Eyes Darkness Dragon deck, which focuses on quickly summoning the eponymous card and strengthening it by placing a large number of Dragon-type monsters in his Graveyard. Once within the body of Fujiwara, Nightshroud uses a Clear deck which shuts down the opponent's strategies based on the attributes of the monsters they summon. Once without a host, Nightshroud uses his personal Darkness deck, which controls the field through its "Darkness" field spell card.
 is the second Shadow Rider. Her name is derived from the title of Joseph Sheridan le Fanu's novel, Carmilla. In the English version, Camula is voiced by Bella Hudson, while Kanako Irie takes the role in the Japanese version.
A vampire, Camula is very serious when it comes to dueling, as she hopes to revive her race from its destruction by the people of Medieval Times. She had been asleep within her coffin until Kagemaru uncovered it and invited her to join the Shadow Riders. She captures the souls of her opponents following their losses within dolls to fuel her cause, and uses the Shadow Charm strangler around her neck to bet the souls of others in conjunction with the Shadow Game-exclusive Illusion Gate to ensure victory. She manages to obtain the keys of Crowler and Zane, but during her Duel with Jaden, her Shadow Charm's power is negated by the completed item that Jaden possesses. Out of self-confidence, Camula places her own soul on the line, and it is dragged into the gate after she loses, leaving her body empty and turning it to dust.
Camula plays a Vampire deck. Several of her monsters (such as Zombie Werewolf and Vampire Bat) can feint revival by either summoning or discarding additional copies of themselves when destroyed through battle. Camula is also able to combine the recursion ability of Vampire Genesis with Genesis Crisis to repetitively raise her undead army from the grave.
 is the third Shadow Rider. In the English version, Tania is voiced by Alyson Johnson, while Kazue Komiya takes the role in the Japanese version.
A white tiger that assumes human form with her Shadow Charm gauntlet to find a worthy duelist to be her husband, Tania travels with another tiger named Bass, who resembles the Amazoness Tiger. She falls in love with Bastion Misawa, and after some sweet talking and showing off her amazing dueling skills, defeats him and makes him her bridegroom for a short time until she grows tired of him. Tania then fights Jaden in a soul match with the effect of Amazon Arena, and eventually resumes her true form and runs off. She appears before Jaden and his group during the third year as her human self, having been sucked into the second alternate dimension they visit since their last meeting. She serves as their guide through the first town they encounter, and stays behind with Bastion after Jaden liberates it.
Tania's Amazoness cards, based on the Amazons of Greek mythology, are divided into two decks: Courage and Knowledge (the former focusing on offense with more damage inflicted via Amazoness Arena, while the latter is more based on turning the opponent's battle strategies against them). She uses the Knowledge deck against Bastion, and the Courage deck against Jaden.
 is the fourth Shadow Rider. In the English version, Zaloog is voiced by Darren Dunstan who impersonates Christopher Walken, while Taiten Kusunoki takes the role in the Japanese version.
Zaloog is actually a Duel Monster spirit brought to life by the power of the Shadow Charm eyepatch he wears. He is also the leader of the band of thieves known as the Dark Scorpion Gang ( in the original Japanese language version), who were also brought to life by the item. He masquerades as a detective named Detective Zaloog (Police Inspector Manguer), sent to assist the students in hiding the remaining Spirit Keys, while his posse work on taking the keys incognito. However, since they fail to obtain the keys in a Duel, they are unable to unlock the Spirit Gate of the Sacred Beasts. When Zaloog and his gang are discovered, he and Chazz Princeton duel with all the remaining keys on the line. In the end, he and his cohorts are defeated, and the power of his Shadow Charm is nullified. After reverting back to their spirit forms, the Dark Scorpions join the many weak monsters in Chazz's care, to the young duelist's annoyance. 
Zaloog plays a Dark Scorpion deck, themed on bringing together the members of the Dark Scorpion Gang and triggering their five effects in unison, with support from cards such as Mustering of the Dark Scorpions and Dark Scorpion Combination. Like his card, however, in the English anime, he wields twin swords and in the Japanese version, he wields guns.
 is the fifth Shadow Rider. His name is derived from the name of the ancient Egyptian city, Abydos. In the English version, Abidos is voiced by Darren Dunstan, while Mamoru Miyano takes the role in the Japanese version.
An ancient pharaoh who never lost a single Duel, Abidos regained physical form through the powers of the Shadow Charm headband he wears. With an army of mummies, Abidos gathers Jaden and company on his celestial yacht for a Duel. During the Duel with Jaden, Abidos realizes that the only reason he kept winning was because his opponents always lost on purpose, simply because he was pharaoh. Jaden, however, manages to give Abidos a real Duel in which the opponent actually tries to win. Satisfied with his defeat, Abidos departs for the afterlife, giving Jaden his Shadow Charm, the latter making a promise to meet him again in one-hundred years time, presuming that Jaden will be dead within that time. 
Abidos plays a Servants of the Pharaoh deck, themed on gathering three Sarcophagus cards to summon Spirit of the Pharaoh.
 is the sixth Shadow Rider. In the English version, Titan is voiced by Eric Stuart, while Norio Wakamoto takes the role in the Japanese version
A hitman originally hired by Crowler to deal with Jaden, Titan captured Alexis Rhodes to force Jaden into a Duel for her life. Despite his reputation of possessing the power of a Millennium Item, the "Millennium Item" turned out to be a fake Millennium Puzzle, and Titan used various tricks to mimic a Shadow Game. He became the victim of a real Shadow Duel, however, but was saved by Kagemaru, wearing a Shadow Charm mask to bind him to the real world. Taking advantage of Alexis' desire to restore her brother's memories, Titan challenges her in the abandoned dorm where they first met. He is ultimately pulled back into the pits of darkness when he is defeated.
Titan plays an Archfiend (Demon) deck, composed largely of monsters based on chess pieces, in his first encounter with Jaden, which is later supported by Fiend Bullfighter (Demon's Matador) cards in his Duel with Alexis; this last deck is inspired by Spanish traditions with names related to bullfighting, such as "Picador", "Matador" and "Banderillero".
 is the seventh and final Shadow Rider. In the English version, Amnael is voiced by Wayne Grayson, while Kappei Yamaguchi takes the role in the Japanese version.
A homunculus inhabited by Lyman Banner's soul. Unable to find Banner's Cat, Pharaoh, Alexis, Chazz, Jaden and the others starts looking for him. While looking, Amnael challenges and defeats both Chazz Princeton and Alexis Rhodes in a duel, who then get sucked into Amnael's book as a result. Jaden gets lead to the abandoned dorm where he defeated Titan. There he finds a mummified body that resembles Banner, and Amnael who later reveals himself to be the spirit of Banner. Both Amnael and Jaden duel which results in Jadens victory. After giving Jaden his Emerald Tablet which previously held his Shadow Charm, Banner is reduced to dust along with his original mummified body. His spirit, however, lives on in the stomach of his cat, Pharaoh.
Solid-phase extraction (SPE) is a separation process by which compounds that are dissolved or suspended in a liquid mixture are separated from other compounds in the mixture according to their physical and chemical properties. Analytical laboratories use solid phase extraction to concentrate and purify samples for analysis. Solid phase extraction can be used to isolate analytes of interest from a wide variety of matrices, including urine, blood, water, beverages, soil, and animal tissue.
SPE uses the affinity of solutes dissolved or suspended in a liquid (known as the mobile phase) for a solid through which the sample is passed (known as the stationary phase) to separate a mixture into desired and undesired components. The result is that either the desired analytes of interest or undesired impurities in the sample are retained on the stationary phase. The portion that passes through the stationary phase is collected or discarded, depending on whether it contains the desired analytes or undesired impurities. If the portion retained on the stationary phase includes the desired analytes, they can then be removed from the stationary phase for collection in an additional step, in which the stationary phase is rinsed with an appropriate eluent.
The stationary phase comes in the form of a packed syringe-shaped cartridge, a 96 well plate or a 47- or 90-mm flat disk, each of which can be mounted on its specific type of extraction manifold. The manifold allows multiple samples to be processed by holding several SPE media in place and allowing for an equal number of samples to pass through them simultaneously. A typical cartridge SPE manifold can accommodate up to 24 cartridges, while a typical disk SPE manifold can accommodate 6 disks. Most SPE manifolds are equipped with a vacuum port. Application of vacuum speeds up the extraction process by pulling the liquid sample through the stationary phase. The analytes are collected in sample tubes inside or below the manifold after they pass through the stationary phase.
Solid phase extraction cartridges and disks are available with a variety of stationary phases, each of which can separate analytes according to different chemical properties. Most stationary phases are based on silica that has been bonded to a specific functional group. Some of these functional groups include hydrocarbon chains of variable length (for reversed phase SPE), quaternary ammonium or amino groups (for anion exchange), and sulfonic acid or carboxyl groups (for cation exchange).
A typical solid phase extraction involves four basic steps. First, the cartridge is equilibrated with a non-polar solvent or slightly polar, which wets the surface and penetrates the bonded phase. Then water, or buffer of the same composition as the sample, is typically washed through the column to wet the silica surface. The sample is then added to the cartridge. As the sample passes through the stationary phase, the analytes in the sample will interact and retain on the sorbent while the solvent, salts, and other impurities pass through the cartridge. After the sample is loaded, the cartridge is washed with buffer or solvent to remove further impurities. Then, the analyte is eluted with a non-polar solvent or a buffer of the appropriate pH. 
A stationary phase of polar functionally bonded silicas with short carbons chains frequently makes up the solid phase. This stationary phase will adsorb polar molecules which can be collected with a more polar solvent.
Reversed phase SPE separates analytes based on their polarity. The stationary phase of a reversed phase SPE cartridge is derivatized with hydrocarbon chains, which retain compounds of mid to low polarity due to the hydrophobic effect. The analyte can be eluted by washing the cartridge with a non-polar solvent, which disrupts the interaction of the analyte and the stationary phase.
A stationary phase of silicon with carbon chains is commonly used. Relying on mainly non-polar, hydrophobic interactions, only non-polar or very weakly polar compounds will adsorb to the surface.
Ion exchange sorbents separate analytes based on electrostatic interactions between the analyte of interest and the positively charged groups on the stationary phase. For ion exchange to occur, both the stationary phase and sample must be at a pH where both are charged.
Anion exchange sorbents are derivatized with positively charged functional groups that interact and retain negatively charged anions, such as acids. Strong anion exchange sorbents contain quaternary ammonium groups that have a permanent positive charge in aqueous solutions, and weak anion exchange sorbents use amine groups which are charged when the pH is below about 9. Strong anion exchange sorbents are useful because any strongly acidic impurities in the sample will bind to the sorbent and usually will not be eluted with the analyte of interest; to recover a strong acid a weak anion exchange cartridge should be used. To elute the analyte from either the strong or weak sorbent, the stationary phase is washed with a solvent that neutralizes the charge of either the analyte, the stationary phase, or both. Once the charge is neutralized, the electrostatic interaction between the analyte and the stationary phase no longer exists and the analyte will elute from the cartridge.
Cation exchange sorbents are derivatized with functional groups that interact and retain positively charged cations, such as bases. Strong cation exchange sorbents contain aliphatic sulfonic acid groups that are always negatively charged in aqueous solution, and weak cation exchange sorbents contain aliphatic carboxylic acids, which are charged when the pH is above about 5. Strong cation exchange sorbents are useful because any strongly basic impurities in the sample will bind to the sorbent and usually will not be eluted with the analyte of interest; to recover a strong base a weak cation exchange cartridge should be used. To elute the analyte from either the strong or weak sorbent, the stationary phase is washed with a solvent that neutralizes ionic interaction between the analyte and the stationary phase.
South Dunedin is a major inner city suburb of the New Zealand city of Dunedin. It is located, as its name suggests, to the south of the city centre, on a large plain known locally simply as "The Flat". The suburb is a mix of industrial, retail, and predominantly lower-quality residential properties. South Dunedin's 2001 population was 2,538.
South Dunedin is a wide area of flat land, much of it reclaimed from the Otago Harbour. This reclaimed area, which lies immediately to the west of the harbour's head, is known as the Southern Endowment, and covers an area of close to .
The Southern Endowment was begun with rock removed during the cutting of Bell Hill in the central city during the nineteenth century. This largely extended the area around the wharves close to the heart of the city, but did not extend any further south until 1912, when a causeway was built along the head of the harbour. As part of a Otago Harbour Board scheme to reclaim land for industrial use, dredges started to pump tailings into the area behind the causeway in the 1940s. Reclamation continued for many years, and was not officially completed until the opening of Portsmouth Drive, which runs along the route of the 1912 causeway at the harbour edge, in 1978.
Most of the area of the southern endowment is industrial and storage, though it does contain a small part close to the wharf area and the major sports complex of The Edgar Centre close to its southern edge.
South Dunedin contains the city's second most important retail district, centred on Cargill's Corner, named for Otago provincial founder Captain William Cargill (Hillside Road - at one time called Cargill Road - is named for his house, "Hillside", which lay some to the north). At this junction, two main suburban arterial routes - King Edward Street and Hillside Road - cross. A small shopping mall, South City, is located at Cargill's Corner.
Cargill's Corner had, for many years, Dunedin's only "Barnes Dance" pedestrian crossing. Its use was phased out during the 1980s.
King Edward Street is aligned roughly north-south, linking with the southern end of Princes Street and the centre city in the north with the densely populated coastal suburb of Saint Kilda. Hillside Road links Andersons Bay Road - a further major suburban arterial - in the east with the suburbs of Caversham, Corstorphine and Saint Clair in the west and southwest.
Smaller, older shops stretch south along King Edward Street and west along Hillside Road from Cargill's Corner. To the east, along Hillside Road and Anderson's Bay Road are larger supermarkets and wholesalers, notably Pak'n Save, The Warehouse, and Mitre 10 Mega. Further along Anderson's Bay Road to the south and to the west on Hillside Road are numerous car sale yards and light industrial works. These extend into Caversham in the west, and across the reclaimed land which lies between Andersons Bay Road and Portsmouth Drive in the south and east. At its southern extreme, King Edward Street becomes increasingly residential, though there are also light industrial premises here.
Andersons Bay Road lies roughly parallel with King Edward Street some to the east. This route, which roughly follows the original shoreline, connects with State Highway 1 and Dunedin's one-way street system in the north, and with the suburb of Musselburgh in the south. It also provides a major route from the centre city with Otago Peninsula. 
Portsmouth Drive, a further arterial route, lies a further to the east. This route links the centre city with Portobello Road, the long, twisting route which travels the length of Otago Peninsula's harbour coast. It is named for Dunedin's American sister city of Portsmouth, Virginia.
Other important roads in South Dunedin include Timaru Street on the Southern Endowment, and several streets which cross or meet King Edward Street, linking it with Anderson's Bay Road in the east or the suburbs of Saint Clair and Forbury in the west. these include Macandrew Road, Melbourne Street, McBride Street, and Bay View Road, the latter of which forms the boundary between South Dunedin and Saint Kilda.
The industrial heart of South Dunedin is the Hillside Railway Workshops, located immediately to the west of Cargills Corner. These workshops cover some and stretch into the neighbouring suburb of Caversham. Other notable buildings in South Dunedin include the Mayfair Theatre, close to Cargill's Corner, and the Edgar Sports Centre, at the southeastern extremity of the suburb on Portsmouth Drive. The city's main sports complex, Carisbrook, is located close to the border of South Dunedin in Caversham. A former stadium, the Caledonian Ground, stood on ground now largely occupied by The Warehouse retail store. It was relocated in 2000 to Logan Park in Dunedin North. The junction of Andersons Bay Road and Hillside Road, located nearby, is still sometimes referred to as "Caledonian Corner".
This corner is also the former site of the country's longest-serving gasworks, which operated from 1863 to 1987, and a small industrial museum, the Dunedin Gasworks Museum, is located on the southern part of its site on Braemar Street. Opened to the public in 2001, this museum is one of only three known preserved gasworks museums in the world. The museum features five steam pumping engines which were used in the gasworks, and an older engine imported from Scotland in 1868.
There are several notable churches in South Dunedin, among them the city's only Eastern Orthodox church, St. Michael's, in Fingall Street, and St. Patrick's Roman Catholic Basilica (designed by Francis Petre) in Macandrew Road.
Other than the Hillside workshops and the gasworks, South Dunedin has several links with Dunedin's industrial heritage. Notable among these was the factory of G. Methven, one of New Zealand's leading bathroom fittings manufacturers. This company, founded by George Methven, was located for many years in Andersons Bay Road on a site now occupied by a Mitre 10 megastore.
Another former landmark in south Dunedin was the former Caledonian sports ground. This was located opposite the gasworks at the corner of Hillside Road and Andersons Bay Road, a site still known as The Caledonian Corner. The sports field was relocated to Dunedin North, and the site is now the car park of The Warehouse - all that remains of the original sports complex is a lawn bowls club and the gymnasium, which is also South Dunedin's main war memorial (Hillside workshops have their own separate memorial by the site's main gate).
 the northeastern edge of the suburb, closest to the city centre, is the smaller suburb of Kensington. Kensington is located on and around King Edward Street at the foot of a spur of Maryhill officially referred to as Montecillo Ridge, and close to the inner city sports ground, the Oval. This ground, originally called the Southern Recreation Ground, is often referred to as the Kensington Oval, so as to distinguish it from the University Oval in the north of the city. This ground is actually triangular, but at one time contained a separate oval cricket ground, which gave it its name. Dunedin Southern Cemetery sits on the slope of Montecillo Ridge immediately above Kensington, separated from it by South Road, a main route to Caversham, which joins with Princes Street close to the Oval. These two green areas mark the southernmost extreme of Dunedin's Town Belt, which sweeps around the central city in a broad crescent through the suburbs of Mornington, Belleknowes, Roslyn, Maori Hill, Woodhaugh, and Dunedin North. 
The lower slopes of Montecillo Ridge were at one time the site of "Hillside", the home of Dunedin city's founding father Captain William Cargill. Though the house is long gone, its name lives on in that of South Dunedin's Hillside Road.
Kensington is largely separated from South Dunedin by an overbridge carrying the South Island Main Trunk railway. The long-closed Kensington railway halt was located immediately to the east of the bridge, and accessed by a flight of stairs in one of the bridge's supports, long since sealed up. A newer flyover 200 metres to the north carries State Highway 1 through Kensington, though there are no slip roads connecting the suburb with the highway. This flyover separates Kensington into two distinct parts, a light industrial zone to the south of the flyover, and a residential zone to the north, at the foot of the ridge.
A notable feature of Kensington is the city's army drill hall, located in Bridgman Street immediately to the south of State Highway 1.
In telecommunications, squelch is a circuit function that acts to suppress the audio (or video) output of a receiver in the absence of a sufficiently strong desired input signal. 
Squelch excludes undesired lower-power input signals that may be present at or near the frequency of the desired signal. Squelch is a noise gate that only allows signals at a specified strength over a threshold to be played through the speaker. As an example, general static (with no transmission) is squelched out. (Contrast with noise suppression.)
A carrier squelch or noise squelch is the most simple variant of all. It operates strictly on the signal strength, such as when a television mutes the audio or blanks the video on "empty" channels, or when a walkie talkie mutes the audio when no signal is present. In some designs, the squelch threshold is preset. For example, television squelch settings are usually preset. Receivers in base stations at remote mountain top sites are usually not adjustable remotely from the control point.
In devices such as radiotelephones (also known as two-way radios), the squelch can be adjusted with a knob, others have push buttons or a sequence of button presses. This setting adjusts the threshold at which signals will open (un-mute) the audio channel. Backing off the control will turn on the audio, and the operator will hear white noise (also called squelch noise) if there is no signal present. The usual operation is to adjust the control until the channel just shuts off - then only a small threshold signal is needed to turn on the speaker. However, if a weak signal is annoying, the operator can adjust the squelch to open only when stronger signals are received. If you hold the squelch open you will also get a lot of noise.
A typical FM two-way radio carrier squelch circuit takes out the voice components of the receive audio by passing the detected audio through a high-pass filter. A typical filter might pass frequencies over 4,000 Hz (4 kHz). The squelch control adjusts the gain of an amplifier which varies the level of noise coming out of the filter. The audio output of the filter and amplifier is rectified and produces a DC voltage when noise is present. The presence of noise creates a DC voltage which turns the receiver audio off. When a signal with little or no noise is received, the voltage goes away and the receiver audio is unmuted. Some applications have the receiver tied to other equipment that uses the audio muting control voltage as a "signal present" indication.
Tone squelch, or other forms of selective calling, are sometimes used to solve interference problems. Where more than one user is on the same channel (co-channel users), selective calling addresses a subset of all receivers. Instead of turning on the receive audio for any signal, the audio turns on only in the presence of the correct selective calling code. This is akin to the use of a lock on a door. A carrier squelch is unlocked and will let any signal in. Selective calling locks out all signals except ones with the correct code. 
In non-critical uses, selective calling can also be used to hide the presence of interfering signals such as receiver-produced intermodulation. Receivers with poor specifications — such as scanners or low-cost mobile radios — cannot reject the strong signals present in urban environments. The interference will still be present. It will still degrade system performance but by using selective calling the user will not have to hear the noises produced by receiving the interference. 
Four different techniques are commonly used. Selective calling can be regarded as a form of in-band signaling.
CTCSS (Continuous Tone-Coded Squelch System) continuously superimposes any one of about 50 low-pitch audio tones on the transmitted signal, ranging from 67 to 254 Hz. The original tone set was 32 tones, and has been expanded over the years. CTCSS is often called PL tone (for Private Line, a trademark of Motorola), or simply tone squelch. General Electric's implementation of CTCSS is called Channel Guard (or CG). RCA Corporation used the name Quiet Channel, or QC. There are many other company-specific names used by radio vendors to describe compatible options. Any CTCSS system that has compatible tones is interchangeable. Old and new radios with CTCSS and radios across manufacturers are compatible.
Selcall (Selective Calling) transmits a burst of five inband audio tones at the beginning of each transmission. This feature (sometimes called "tone burst") is common in European systems. In the same way that a single CTCSS tone would be used on an entire group of radios, a single five-tone sequence is used in a group of radios.
DCS (Digital-Coded Squelch) superimposes a continuous stream of FSK digital data, at 134.4 bits per second, on the transmitted signal. In the same way that a single CTCSS tone would be used on an entire group of radios, the same DCS code is used in a group of radios. DCS is also referred to as Digital Private Line (or DPL), another trademark of Motorola, and likewise, General Electric's implementation of DCS is referred to a Digital Channel Guard (or DCG). DCS is also called DTCS (Digital Tone Code Squelch) by Icom, and other names by other manufacturers. Radios with DCS options are generally compatible provided the radio's encoder-decoder will use the same code as radios in the existing system.
Be aware that the same 23-bit DCS word can, for example produce three different valid DCS codes.
XTCSS is the newest signaling technique and it provides 99 codes with the added advantage of 'silent operation'. XTCSS fitted radios are purposed to enjoy more privacy and flexibility of operation. XTCSS is implemented as a combination of CTCSS and in-band signalling.
Carrier squelch was invented first and is still in wide use in two-way radio, especially in the amateur radio world. Squelch of any kind is used to indicate loss of signal, which is used to keep commercial and Amateur radio repeaters from transmitting continually. Since a carrier squelch receiver cannot tell a valid carrier from a spurious signal (noise, etc) CTCSS is often used as well, as it avoids false keyups. Use of CTCSS is especially helpful on bands prone to skip and during band openings.
Family Radio Service (FRS) and PMR446 radios often use a number of different CTCSS tones, usually erroneously called "sub-channels" (the actual number of tones depends on the manufacturer). While these do not add to the available number of conversations which can take place at once in a given area, they do reduce annoying interference experienced by users. However they do not afford any protection from eavesdropping, as the voice signal is not encrypted. The squelch system relies on the receiver to comply with the squelch signal, but if a receiver chooses to listen in, the signal is not protected.
It is a bad idea to use any coded squelch system to hide interference issues in systems with life-safety or public-safety uses such as police, fire, search and rescue or ambulance company dispatching. Adding tone or digital squelch to a radio system doesn't solve interference issues, it just covers them up. The presence of interfering signals should be corrected rather than masked. Interfering signals masked by tone squelch will produce apparently random missed messages. The intermittent nature of interfering signals will make the problem difficult to reproduce and troubleshoot. Users will not understand why they cannot hear a call, and will lose confidence in their radio system.
Professional wireless microphones use squelch to avoid reproducing noise when the receiver does not receive enough signal from the microphone. Most professional models have adjustable squelch, usually set with a screwdriver adjustment on the receiver.

Summer Shaw is a fictional character from the long-running Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks, played by Summer Strallen. The character is most notable for being 'planted' in the show as publicity for an Andrew Lloyd Webber produced stage production of The Sound of Music. Making national headlines, Summer the fictional character won the same leading role of Maria that Strallen had been cast as in the West End show.
Summer arrives as an undergraduate at Hollyoaks Community College who has moved to Chester and who seems to have an interfering mother constantly phoning her to check if she is okay. John Paul and Katy spot her conversing with her mother on the phone and realise a pair of underwear has dropped from her suitcase as she gathers her bags and walks off to find the admissions office. John Paul screams for her but she does not hear him. Later, while dining at Il Gnosh the two spot her again where John Paul timidly returns the pair of underwear to her and introduces himself. The two strike up a friendship and while walking through the college, she talks lots about herself and her passion for the performing arts. John Paul invites her for a drink, which Katy does not join them , probably as she finds her a bit full on. While John Paul strikes up a conversation with Jay, Summer befriends Russ while sitting at the bar.
While attending John Paul's housewarming party at the halls, Summer caught the eye of Kris Fisher. The carbon monoxide leak from the faulty boiler rendered her unconscious along with all the other people in the party, Summer was drowsy but recovered at the scene, she was given the all clear by doctors and was told to go home.
At a swimming pool in which O.B. had taken Tom to teach him how to swim O.B. saw Summer and started chatting her up. He was so busy talking to her that he didn't notice Tom taking his armbands off before jumping in and having to be saved by Simon Crosby. Summer then started working at MOBs where it was obvious that O.B. had a crush on her and she clashed with Max Cunningham's girlfriend Steph Dean who she worked with and originally met after they both went for a part to star in a health and safety video.
After running into Nancy Hayton and Sarah Barnes, the trio decided to go for a drink. When a guy walked into the SU Bar, when Sarah said "Ooh,I'd have a bit of that!",where Nancy replied "No,he's not my type", before Summer noticed him, and called out "James!" Nancy and Sarah both looked horrified by what they said.
James, Summer's long-term boyfriend, is in the Army and tells Summer he's on leave because he is to spend five months in Afghanistan - and he leaves the next day. Summer considered asking him to stay,before a heart-to-heart with Sarah, who asked her "what if you landed a part in a Broadway show?" "I'd ask him to come with me" "For him to drop everything to follow your dreams, when you wouldn't let him follow his?" Summer understood that she couldn't have it all her way, and let him go, after telling him "if you get yourself killed out there I'll murder you!" "You say that everytime!" The pair kiss, and James left in a Taxi.
On the 15th November 2007 Summer received a phone call from James. After the credits had ended she was crying and told O.B. that it was over between her and James, she ran off leaving O.B. alone at The Dog in The Pond.
Summer recently shared a kiss with Kris Fisher after their radio show was taken over by 'pirates' aka John Paul McQueen and Elliot Bevan. But then it was revealed that they are a couple when she tells OB "I never would have thought I would have a boyfriend who looked better than me in lipgloss."
However, after realising her feelings for OB, she breaks up with Kris claiming he is too high maintenance. This results in quite a nasty argument between them - Kris calling Summer shallow while Summer stated that cross-dressing didn't make him any more special ,and that he 'wakes up in the morning and thinks, who shall I be today, male or female?'
Later Kris sees Summer having lunch with OB and is angry,but when OB defends her Kris and OB 'fight', ending in Summer pouring water over them.
On 25 January 2008, after Steph suggested that they should form a band, Summer decided she'd had enough of life in Hollyoaks and wanted to try her luck at living in London. She wanted to be able to chase her dreams and not wait for the opportunities to come to her. She asked O.B. to go with her but he refused saying that he couldn't let Max down by leaving. After one last ditch attempt to convince O.B. to come with her, she walked out the door.
Later, Max convinced O.B. to leave with Summer, saying that she is the best thing that's ever happened to him. They race to the bus station in the MOBs van, arriving just as the bus is about to leave. O.B. hopped on the bus and tells Summer that she only asked him twice to leave and everyone knows that it's three times for luck. After a hug and a kiss, they departed for London with Max looking on.
After arriving in London, Summer sets about trying to find Andrew Lloyd Webber so that she can try to get a part in one of his plays.
On 1 February 2008, despite her nerves during an audition, Summer has successfully been offered a part of Maria in The Sound Of Music, one of Andrew Lloyd Webber's plays.
On 15 February 2008, Summer made her exit from Hollyoaks, leading a new life to star in one of Andrew Lloyd Webber's plays. But with O.B.'s second thoughts about moving out, Summer realises she has to start a new life alone, even without him.
On 28 February 2008, O.B. chased his dream and him and Summer got back together, with him remaining in London with her to start their new life. The last time her being seen onscreen.

The Tabuk Sniper Rifle is an Iraqi modification of a Serbian designated marksman's rifle, made from as a modified version of the Zastava M70 assault rifle. The Tabuk Sniper Rifle, like all the AK-47 and Dragunov SVD derivatives made in Iraq, was manufactured at the Al-Qadissiya Establishments using machineries sold to Iraq, with the power at the time still firmly in the hands of Saddam Hussein, by Zastava of Yugoslavia.
Zastava of Yugoslavia originally developed this rifle from its experience in making its M70 rifles (a variant of the AKM with some minor differences from the original), particularly the M76. All of the rifles in the M70 series share what is traditionally considered an RPK style receiver, that is the receiver is made with a thicker gauge of sheet metal formed over a larger and heavier trunion. While this does add to weight, it has a positive effect on durability which is why the modification came about (for the Russian RPK). The Yugoslavian RPK or M72, is the longer barreled member of the M70 family, and is the weapons upon which the Tabuk is based. 
The Tabuk Rifle, unlike the Yugoslavian RPK, has a 24.5" barrel including flash hider, the actual barrel length is closer to 21.4" - slightly shorter than a Soviet RPK, but much longer than a traditional AKM or the M70 (16.25"). The Tabuk, like the RPK has a provision for muzzle attachments in the typical Russian thread pattern of 14x1mm left hand thread, which means that it can accept several variations of soviet flash hiders and muzzle brakes, as well as soviet designed sound suppression devices. 
After incidents in Baghdad in the Summer of 2005 initial media descriptions of the Tabuk Rifle were misspelled in many media reports as "Tobuk" or "Tobok". Tabook/Tabouk (the latter two spellings are more correct transliterations of the Arabic تبوك ) is a common place name in the Arab world, as it was the site of an historically significant battle during the lifetime of the Muslim Prophet Mohammed. The most common association is probably the capitol city of the Saudi province of the same name (Saudi Arabia maps county detail provinces)

In many of these reports, the Tabuk Rifle is described incorrectly as being based on the SVD Dragunov. Unlike the Kalashnikov (AK-47 and AK-74) rifles, which fire 7.62x39mm and 5.45x39mm rounds respectively, the Dragunov and its variants chamber the older 7.62x54mmR cartridge, adopted by the Russian Army in 1891 by way of the Mosin-Nagant 1891 rifle that, in various forms, was used through the end of World War II and beyond.
This would be an easy mistake to make, as the furniture of the Tabuk looks much like the Dragunov and has a longer barrel like that of the latter rifle's 620 mm/24.4 inches.
The differences between the Tabuk and the Yugo RPK are in fact few; The semi auto only internals included with the Tabuk is a visually unobvious difference but perhaps the most important. It is this feature that dictates the rifles role as one of precision fire and not suppressive fire. It is also important as it prevents relatively untrained individuals from subjecting the barrel of a rifle intended for precision to ful-alto fire, as such would only act to shorten said rifle's useful life. 
A more distinguishing difference, and perhaps the most important visual cue, is the fact that the RPK's barrel is finned at the rear near the hand guards and far heavier than a standard AKM (or for that matter the Tabuk). The weight (thickness) of the RPK's barrel exists to facilitate heat distribution via mass and cooling via surface area. Since the option to fire full auto has been omitted (and it is not typical of eastern block long range precision rifles to use heavy barrels for accuracy) the Tabuk, like the SVD and the PSL has a relatively light barrel. 
The Tabuk differs from the M72 in some other ways. It has the provision for mounting optics for one, though this is not an unusual accessory on eastern bloc weapons, and it has a skeletonized buttstock with a cheek piece. A third difference and perhaps the most important (though not definitive) visual cue when identifying the Tabuk is the conspicuous lack of a bipod. The bipod, which is not detachable from the M72 (though sometimes removed by undisciplined troops), is quite obvious from afar when attached. It was likely removed to enhance mechanical accuracy, and reduce weight, though if it were left attached it may have added stability (practical accuracy) for long range work. 
As it is essentially an accurized, scoped RPK, the Tabuk is subsequently chambered in the RPK's primary caliber, 7.62x39. This is advantageous as it allows the Tabuk to use the same magazines as the AK-47, and Ak-47 Magazines are well made, plentiful, and easy to replace if lost.
Because the Tabuk it is chambered in the soviet M43 or 7.62x39mm cartridge, it cannot technically function as a sniper rifle (by western standards). With a maximum effective range of only 600m (based on trajectory), the Tabuk should instead be considered a designated marksman's rifle. That said, and considering the terrain upon which these rifles are typically fielded (urban), this quibble is purely semantics. 
The Tabuk is, within its given range, every bit as effective as the Dragunov or PSL if used precisely. However, from the point of terminal ballistics the soviet 7.62x39mm is too stable in tissue. At the far end of its effective range it is decidedly less lethal than its higher velocity counterparts due to the round's combination of stability and low velocity, giving it less reach than the 7.62x54R caliber SVD. It visually resembles an RPK, which may make identifying enemy snipers/designated marks men more difficult. Likewise, its acoustic signature mimics that of an AK-47. Being chambered for a relatively low velocity intermediate round, the Tabuk has poor barrier penetration and performance against body armor compared to weapons chambered for full-powered cartridges like 7.62x51 or 7.62x54R.

 was a daimyo in the Sengoku period who unified the political factions of Japan. He succeeded his former liege lord, Oda Nobunaga, and brought an end to the Sengoku period. The period of his rule is often called the Momoyama period, named after Hideyoshi's castle. He is noted for a number of cultural legacies, including the restriction that only members of the samurai class could bear arms. Hideyoshi is regarded as Japan's second "great unifier."
Very little is known for certain about Hideyoshi before 1570, when he begins to appear in surviving documents and letters. His autobiography starts in 1577 but in it Hideyoshi spoke very little about his past. By tradition, he was born in what is now Nakamura-ku, Nagoya (situated in modern-day Aichi District, Owari Province), the home of the Oda clan. He was born of no traceable samurai lineage, being the son of a peasant-warrior named Yaemon.
 He had no surname, and his childhood given name was ("Bounty of the Sun") although variations exist. 
Toyotomi Hideyoshi had been given the nickname Kozaru, meaning "little monkey", from his lord Oda Nobunaga because his facial features and skinny form resembled that of a monkey. He was also known as the "bald rat."
Many legends describe Hideyoshi being sent to study at a temple as a young man, but he rejected temple life and went in search of adventure. Under the name , he first joined the Imagawa clan as a servant to a local ruler named Matsushita Yukitsuna. He traveled all the way to the lands of Imagawa Yoshimoto, daimyo of Suruga Province, and served there for a time, only to abscond with a sum of money entrusted to him by Matsushita Yukitsuna.
Around 1547 he returned to Owari Province and joined the Oda clan, now headed by Oda Nobunaga, as a lowly servant. He became one of Nobunaga's sandal-bearers and was present at the Battle of Okehazama in 1560 when Nobunaga defeated Imagawa Yoshimoto to become one of the most powerful warlords in the Sengoku period. According to his biographers, he supervised the repair of Kiyosu Castle, a claim described as "apocryphal", and managed the kitchen. In 1561, Hideyoshi married Nene who was Asano Nagamasa's adopted daughter. He carried out repairs on Sunomata Castle with his younger brother Toyotomi Hidenaga and the bandits Hachisuka Masakatsu and Maeno Nagayasu. Hideyoshi's efforts were well received because Sunomata was in enemy territory. He constructed a fort in Sunomata, according to legend overnight, and discovered a secret route into Mount Inaba after which much of the garrison surrendered.
Hideyoshi was very successful as a negotiator. In 1564 he managed to convince, mostly with liberal bribes, a number of Mino warlords to desert the Saito clan. Hideyoshi approached many Saito clan samurai and convinced them to submit to Nobunaga, including the Saito clan's strategist Takenaka Hanbei. 
Nobunaga's easy victory at Inabayama Castle in 1567 was largely due to Hideyoshi's efforts, and despite his peasant origins, Hideyoshi became one of Nobunaga's most distinguished generals, eventually taking the name Hashiba Hideyoshi (?? ??). The new surname included two characters, one each from Oda's two other right-hand men, Niwa Nagahide and Shibata Katsuie. 
Hideyoshi led troops in the Battle of Anegawa in 1570 in which Oda Nobunaga allied with future rival Tokugawa Ieyasu (who would eventually displace Hideyoshi's son and rule Japan) to lay siege to two fortresses of the Azai and Asakura clans. In 1573, after victorious campaigns against the Azai and Asakura, Nobunaga appointed Hideyoshi daimyo of three districts in the northern part of Omi Province. Initially based at the former Azai headquarters in Odani, Hideyoshi moved to Kunitomo, and renamed the city Nagahama in tribute to Nobunaga. Hideyoshi later moved to the port at Imahama on Lake Biwa. From there he began work on Imahama Castle and took control of the nearby Kunitomo firearms factory that had been established some years previously by the Azai and Asakura. Under Hideyoshi's administration the factory's output of firearms increased dramatically. Nobunaga sent Hideyoshi to Himeji Castle to conquer Chugoku region in 1576.
After the assassinations at Honno-ji of Oda Nobunaga and his eldest son Nobutada in 1582 at the hands of Akechi Mitsuhide, Hideyoshi defeated Akechi at the Battle of Yamazaki.
At a meeting at Kiyosu to decide on a successor to Nobunaga, Hideyoshi cast aside the apparent candidate, Oda Nobutaka and his advocate, Oda clan's chief general, Shibata Katsuie, by supporting Nobutada's young son, Oda Hidenobu. Having won the support of the other two Oda elders, Niwa Nagahide and Ikeda Tsuneoki, Hideyoshi established Hidenobu's position, as well as his own influence in the Oda clan. Tension quickly escalated between Hideyoshi and Katsuie, and at the Battle of Shizugatake in the following year, Hideyoshi destroyed Katsuie's forces and thus consolidated his own power, absorbing most of the Oda clan into his control.
In 1583, Hideyoshi began construction of Osaka Castle. Built on the site of the temple Ishiyama Honganji destroyed by Nobunaga, the castle would become the last stronghold of the Toyotomi clan after Hideyoshi's death.
Nobunaga's other son, Oda Nobukatsu, remained hostile to Hideyoshi. He allied himself with Tokugawa Ieyasu, and the two sides fought at the inconclusive Battle of Komaki and Nagakute. It ultimately resulted in a stalemate, although Hideyoshi's forces were delivered a heavy blow.. Finally, Hideyoshi made peace with Nobukatsu, ending the pretext for war between the Tokugawa and Hashiba clans. Hideyoshi sent Tokugawa Ieyasu his younger sister Asahi no kata and mother Omandokoro (???) as hostages. Ieyasu eventually agreed to become a vassal of Hideyoshi.
Like Nobunaga before him, Hideyoshi never achieved the title of shogun. Instead, he arranged to have himself adopted into the Fujiwara Regents House, and secured a succession of high imperial court titles including, in 1585 the prestigious position of regent (kampaku). In 1586, Hideyoshi was formally given the name Toyotomi by the imperial court. He built a lavish palace, the Jurakudai, in 1587 and entertained the reigning Emperor Go-Yozei the following year.
Afterwards, Hideyoshi subjugated Kii Province and conquered Shikoku under the Chosokabe clan. He also took control of Etchu Province and conquered Kyushu. In 1587, Hideyoshi banished Christian missionaries from Kyushu to exert greater control over the Kirishitan daimyo. However, since he made much of trade with Europeans, individual Christians were overlooked unofficially. In 1588, Hideyoshi forbade ordinary peasants from owning weapons and started a sword hunt to confiscate arms. The swords were melted down to create a statue of the Buddha. This measure effectively stopped peasant revolts and ensured greater stability at the expense of freedom of the individual daimyo. The 1590 Siege of Odawara against the Late Hojo clan in Kanto eliminated the last resistance to Hideyoshi's authority. His victory signified the end of the Sengoku period. During this siege, Hideyoshi proposed that Ieyasu currently controlled five provinces were submitted, and Ieyasu receive the eight Kanto provinces that Kitajo ruled. Ieyasu accepted this proposal. and Date Masamune pledged loyalty to the Hideyoshi.
In February 1591, Hideyoshi ordered Sen no Rikyu to commit suicide. Rikyu had been a trusted retainer and master of the tea ceremony under both Hideyoshi and Nobunaga. Under Hideyoshi's patronage, Rikyu made significant changes to the aesthetics of the tea ceremony that had lasting influence over many aspects of Japanese culture. Even after he ordered Rikyu's suicide, Hideyoshi is said to have built his many construction projects based upon principles of beauty promoted by Rikyu.
Following Rikyu's death, Hideyoshi turned his attentions from tea ceremony to Noh, which he had been studying in the Komparu style since becoming kampaku. During his brief stay in Nagoya Castle in what is today Saga prefecture, on Kyushu, Hideyoshi memorized the shite (lead roles) parts of ten Noh plays, which he then performed, forcing various daimyo to accompany him onstage as the waki (secondary, accompanying role). He even performed before the Emperor.
The stability of the Toyotomi dynasty after Hideyoshi's death was put in doubt with the death of his only son Tsurumatsu in September 1591. The three-year-old was his only child. When his half-brother Hidenaga died shortly after his son, Hideyoshi named his nephew Hidetsugu his heir, adopting him in January 1592. Hideyoshi resigned as kampaku to take the title of taiko (retired regent). Hidetsugu succeeded him as kampaku.
His health beginning to falter, but still yearning for some accomplishment to solidify his legacy, Hideyoshi adopted the dream of a Japanese conquest of China that Oda Nobunaga had contemplated, and launched two ill-fated invasions of Korea. Though he actually intended to conquer Ming China, Hideyoshi had been communicating with the Koreans since 1587 requesting unmolested passage into China. As allies of Ming China, the Koreans at first refused talks entirely, and in April and July 1591 refused demands that Japanese troops be allowed to march through Korea. The Koreans were also concerned that allowing Japanese troops to march through Korea (Chosun) would mean that masses of Ming Chinese troops would battle Hideyoshi's troops on Korean soil before they could reach China—effectively ruining the Chosun economy. The sad reality was that the Koreans faced a Catch-22 because refusing safe passage for the Japanese troops would lead to a Japanese attack. In August, Hideyoshi ordered preparations for invasion.
In the first campaign, Hideyoshi appointed Ukita Hideie to the field marshal, and had them go to the Korean peninsula in April, 1592. Konishi Yukinaga occupied Seoul, the capital of the Joseon Dynasty on May 10, and in only four months, Hideyoshi's forces had a route into Manchuria and occupied much of Korea. Korean king Seonjo of Joseon escaped to Pyongyang, and requested military intervention from China. In 1593, Ming Chinese Emperor Wanli sent an army under general Li Rusong to block the planned invasion of China and recapture the Korean peninsula. Li recaptured Pyongyang, and surrounded Seoul. Ishida Mitsunari massed Japanese forces in Seoul and halted Li Rusong and his forces with a serious counterattack. The war reached a deadlock, and after the conclusion of a cease-fire agreement, Japanese troops retreated to Japan. 
The birth of Hideyoshi's second son, Hideyori, in 1593 created a potential succession problem. To avoid it, Hideyoshi exiled his nephew and heir Hidetsugu to Mount Koya and then ordered him to commit suicide in August 1595. Hidetsugu's family members who did not follow his example were then murdered in Kyoto, including 31 women and several children.
On February 5, 1597, Toyotomi Hideyoshi had twenty-six Christians killed as an example to Japanese who wanted to convert to Christianity. They are known as the Twenty-six Martyrs of Japan. They included five European Franciscan missionaries, one Mexican Franciscan missionary, three Japanese Jesuits and seventeen Japanese laymen including three young boys. They were executed by public crucifixion in Nagasaki.
After several years of negotiations (broken off because envoys of both sides falsely reported to their masters that the opposition surrendered), Hideyoshi appointed Kobayakawa Hideaki to lead the invasion forces, but their efforts on the Korean peninsula met with less success than the first invasion. Japanese troops remained pinned in Gyeongsang province. By June 1598, The Japanese forces fought with desperation, turning back several Chinese offensives in Suncheon and Sacheon as the Ming army prepared for a final assault. The Koreans guerrilla warfare, aided by the fact that they were fighting on their homeland, continually harassed Japanese forces. While Hideyoshi's last battle at So-chon, was a major Japanese victory, all three parties to the war were exhausted. and Hideyoshi himself now accepted that the war could not be won. He told his commander in Korea: "Don't let my soldiers become spirits in a foreign land.", Toyotomi Hideyoshi died in August 18, 1598. His death was kept secret by the Council of Five Elders to preserve morale, and Japanese troops were withdrawn from the Korean peninsula.
Because of his failure to capture Korea, Hideyoshi's forces were unable to invade China. Rather than strengthen his position, the military expeditions left his clan's coffers and fighting strength depleted, his vassals at odds over responsibility for the failure, and the clans that were loyal to the Toyotomi name weakened. The dream of a Japanese empire encompassing Asia ended with Hideyoshi. The Tokugawa government not only prohibited any military expeditions to the mainland, but closed Japan to nearly all foreigners during the years of the Tokugawa Shogunate. It was not until the late 19th century that Japan would again fight a war against China through Korea, using much the same route that Hideyoshi's invasion force had used.
After his death, the other members of the Council of Five Regents were unable to keep the ambitions of Tokugawa Ieyasu in check. Two of Hideyoshi's top generals Kato Kiyomasa and Fukushima Masanori had fought bravely during the war, but returned to find the Toyotomi clan castellan Ishida Mitsunari in power. He held the generals in low esteem, and they sided with Tokugawa Ieyasu. Hideyoshi's underaged son and designated successor Hideyori lost the power his father once held, and Tokugawa Ieyasu was declared Shogun following the Battle of Sekigahara.
Toyotomi Hideyoshi changed Japanese society in many ways. These include imposition of a rigid class structure, restriction on travel, and surveys of land and production.
Class reforms affected commoners and warriors. During the Sengoku period, it had become common for peasants to become warriors, or for samurai to farm due to the constant uncertainty caused by the lack of centralized government and always tentative peace. Upon taking control, Hideyoshi decreed that all peasants be disarmed completely. Conversely, he required samurai to leave the land and take up residence in the castle towns. This solidified the social class system for the next 300 years. 
Furthermore, he ordered comprehensive surveys and a complete census of Japan. Once this was done and all citizens were registered, he required all Japanese to stay in their respective han (fiefs) unless they obtained official permission to go elsewhere. This ensured order in a period when bandits still roamed the countryside and peace was still new. The land surveys formed the basis for systematic taxation.
In 1590, Hideyoshi completed construction of the Osaka Castle, the largest and most formidable in all Japan, to guard the western approaches to Kyoto. In that same year, Hideyoshi banned "unfree labor" or slavery; but forms of contract and indentured labor persisted alongside the period penal codes' forced labor. 
Hideyoshi also influenced the material culture of Japan. He lavished time and money on the tea ceremony, collecting implements, sponsoring lavish social events, and patronizing acclaimed masters. As interest in the tea ceremony rose among the ruling class, so too did demand for fine ceramic implements, and during the course of the Korean campaigns, not only were large quantities of prized ceramic ware confiscated, many Korean artisans were forcibly relocated to Japan.
Inspired by the dazzling Golden Pavilion in Kyoto, he also constructed a fabulous portable tea room, covered with gold leaf and lined inside with red gossamer. Using this mobile innovation, he was able to practice the tea ceremony wherever he went, powerfully projecting his unrivaled power and status upon his arrival.
Politically, he set up a governmental system that balanced out the most powerful Japanese warlords (or daimyo). A council was created to include the most influential lords. At the same time, a regent was designated to be in command. 
Just prior to his death, Hideyoshi hoped to set up a system stable enough to survive until his son grew old enough to become the next leader. A was formed, consisting of the five most powerful daimyo. Following the death of Maeda Toshiie, however, Tokugawa Ieyasu began to secure alliances, including political marriages (which had been forbidden by Hideyoshi). Eventually, the pro-Toyotomi forces fought against the Tokugawa in the Battle of Sekigahara. Ieyasu won and received the title of Seii-tai Shogun two years later.
Hideyoshi is commemorated at several Toyokuni Shrines scattered over Japan.
Ieyasu left in place the majority of Hideyoshi's decrees and built his shogunate upon them. This ensured that Hideyoshi's cultural legacy remained. In a letter to his wife, Hideyoshi wrote:
Because of his low birth and high nobility, Toyotomi Hideyoshi had quite a few names throughout his life. At birth, he was given the name Hiyoshi-maru . At genpuku he took the name . Later, he was given the surname Hashiba, and the honorary court office Chikuzen no Kami; as a result he was styled . His surname remained Hashiba even as he was granted the new uji or sei ( or , clan name) Toyotomi by the emperor. His name is correctly Toyotomi no Hideyoshi. Using the writing system of his time, his name is written as ?? ??.
The Toyotomi uji was simultaneously granted to a number of Hideyoshi's chosen allies, who adopted the new uji "" (Toyotomi no asomi, courtier of Toyotomi).
The Catholic sources of the time referred to him as "emperor Taicosama" (from taiko, a retired kampaku (see Sessho and Kampaku), and the honorific sama).
His nickname was "Monkey" (Saru), allegedly given by Oda Nobunaga because of his facial resemblance to a monkey. This recognition directly contributed to the popular image of Toyotomi Hideyoshi being a monkey styled person, both in appearance and mode of behaviour. 


WAKR is an AM radio station in Akron, Ohio, USA operating on 1590 kHz. It is owned by Rubber City Radio Group, Inc. which also owns Akron's WONE-FM and WQMX. The station features local news and talk in the morning, with an oldies format throughout the rest of the day. 
WAKR has also been for many years the Akron affiliate for broadcasts of the Cleveland Indians, Cleveland Browns and Cleveland Cavaliers. Their news department (dubbed the "Akron Radio Center Newsroom" and "AkronNewsNow") also feeds drive-time news and traffic updates to sister stations WONE and WQMX, updates the company's "AkronNewsNow" local news and information website , and operates an all-news internet station dubbed "WAKRNewsNow" .
The station began broadcasting on October 16, 1940, founded by S. Bernard Berk and licensed to his family owned business Summit Radio Corp. It became the Blue Network and then the ABC radio affiliate for Akron, broadcasting with 5,000 watts.
While crosstown rival WADC (now WARF) had the advantage of being a CBS affiliate with its popular network programs, WAKR built its reputation primarily through local programming, supplemented with an active news department. The local emphasis worked, and during WAKR's peak, in 1946 and 1947, Hooper ratings showed the station with as much as 60 percent of the Akron audience.
In 1945 Alan Freed joined WAKR and became a local favorite, playing hot jazz and pop recordings. When he left the station, the non-compete clause in his contract limited its ability to find work elsewhere, and he was forced to take the graveyard shift at Cleveland's WJW radio where he eventually made history playing the music he called "Rock and Roll."
In 1946, Berk expanded ownership of Summit Radio Corp. by selling 45% to the Beacon Journal Publishing Co., publishers of the Akron Beacon Journal. The newspaper company would continue to own a piece of Summit's operations for 30 years.
During the 1950s and 1960s WAKR was Akron's premier radio station. It operated as a very successful Top 40 station during the 1960s, competing with cross-town WHLO. WAKR also started Akron's first FM station, WAKR-FM, in 1948. It changed to easy listening WAEZ in the late 1960s, and became rock WONE-FM on January 1, 1985.
WAKR also started Akron's first television station WAKR-TV in 1953. Originally intended as a VHF licencee on channel 11, it wound up on channel 49 after an FCC imposed freeze on future VHF stations, as well as a merging of the Cleveland and Akron markets into one single market. The station moved to channel 23 in 1967, and was affiliated with ABC despite Cleveland's WEWS also holding an ABC affiliation. Many of WAKR's personalities shared airtime on the TV side throughout this time period; current afternoon host Tim Daugherty was a weatherman on WAKR-TV for many years. The TV station changed its callsign to WAKC-TV in 1986 when Group One was broken up, and it now known as WVPX-TV, targeted to the Cleveland market.
Since taking to the air, WAKR has been the home to many personalities who would become national stars, among them film actors Lola Albright and Mark Stevens; radio names Peter Hackes, Scott Muni and Charlie Greer; and the first host of TV's Jeopardy! Art Fleming (known there as Art Fazzin).
Ownership of the Berk family broadcasting interests was organized as Group One Broadcasting around 1965 when it purchased WONE (AM) and WONE-FM (later WTUE) in Dayton. It bought KBOX and KBOX-FM in Dallas in 1967, and KLZ and KLZ-FM in Denver in 1972. Summit Radio and Group One were dissolved in June 1986, and the station passed through four different owners in the next seven years. By then, WAKR was airing a full-service adult contemporary/pop music format.
WAKR along with WONE-FM and the other Group One stations were sold to DKM Broadcasting in June 1986 (WAKR's license was transferred in September 1986). DKM (Dyson Kissner-Moran) sold all of its properties, including other stations in Dayton, Dallas, Denver, Baltimore, Springfield and Lincoln, on January 1, 1988 for $200 million to Summit Communications Group (which had no connection to Summit Radio, WAKR's previous owner).
Ownership passed to U.S. Radio headed by Ragan Henry on December 7, 1989. Not too long after the Gulf War in early 1992, WAKR abruptly dropped its' standards format, and went into a news-talk format. It featured national hosts Rush Limbaugh and Larry King, local talk hosts Bill Hall and Dave Milo, plus a morning-drive news program hosted by Bob Allen, the lone holdover from the previous format. WAKR and WONE-FM were then transferred on December 6, 1993 to Gordon-Thomas Communications, Inc., headed by Thom Mandel, which also owned WQMX. The company changed its name to Rubber City Radio Group on the same day.
WAKR failed to catch on with the news/talk format, and Mandel himself felt a need to revert WAKR back to its' full service format. In mid-1994, WAKR did just that, becoming a pop standards/talk hybrid with Bob Allen, Bob Friend and Christie Maxx during the daytime and national talk with Bruce Williams and Jim Bohannon at night. In 1997, the station went back to talk, but on a more national scale with Gary Burbank, The Fabulous Sports Babe and ESPN Radio programming eventually added into the schedule. News-intensive local programming was kept in both morning and afternoon drive.
In 1999, the station reverted back into a standards format with most music programming being satellite-based from Westwood One, with its' morning news program as the lone holdover of the previous format. Coincidentally, two of the Westwood One Adult Standards personalities that were heard on the station had local ties: format program director Chick Watkins was program director at WCUE and WCUE-FM from 1956 to 1970 (and also was program director for Cleveland's WGAR from 1970 to 1982), while overnight voice Jerry Healey was WAKR's morning host in the late 60s and early 70s.
An all-local weekday lineup was officially unveiled on August 30, 2006. It features Ray Horner as host of the morning news program, Cleveland and Akron radio veteran Chuck Collins in middays, Tim Daugherty in afternoons, Debbie Golden in evenings, and James Lee in overnights. Dick Bartley's Classic Countdown Show is heard on the weekends, while Bob Allen moved from afternoons to weekends before retiring in February 2010. With this change, WAKR's newscasts were also increased in terms of length and content. It was a key affiliate for Paul Harvey up until Harvey's passing in March of 2009.
In the fall of 2007, WAKR began to shift the music portion of its format from adult standards to Oldies. Program director Chuck Collins told Radio & Records in October that the station's evolution from standards to oldies would be complete by the end of the year . The change helps fill the gap for the oldies format created in the Akron/Canton area by WHBC-AM's recent elimination of oldies music from its program schedule to become a news/talk station. WAKR commemorated their 70th anniversary in 2010 by revived many of their classic jingles from the 1960s and 1970s, while also airing montages and airchecks from past personalities.
One of WAKR's Sunday morning religious programs, "Uniform Faith" with the Furnace Street Mission, is the oldest continuing Christian radio program in the United States, originally airing on WADC in 1926 .


Warrior Soul, The Memoir of a Navy SEAL, Chuck Pfarrer, Random House, 2004. ISBN 0-89141-863-6. Warrior Soul is a memoir of former Navy SEAL Chuck Pfarrer from the start of his career to his last mission. He writes in an honest way although some areas are not specific in which he cites that he cannot reveal that much due to continued secrecy. This memoir is praised by the New York Times bookseller as the best memoir of a former SEAL.
Chuck Pfarrer writes about his career beginning with a story of his last mission with SEAL Team 6. Disguised as regular people, the team meets up at Norfolk International Airport to prepare to board an American Airlines Boeing 727 for a flight to a unknown destination. It is actually a test mission for military air traffic control in the Norfolk, Virginia area to see if they can detect a free falling SEAL team, and the American Airlines plane is actually being flown by a SEAL that's certified in flying aircraft. The 727 takes off and flies towards Florida as a disguised as any regular flight when it suddenly banks back to Norfolk, switches its identity to a military aircraft, and request the Norfolk Air Traffic Control Tower to do a touch- and- go approach to the airport. While this is happening, Chuck and his team are gearing up with all of their gear (SEAL's practiced in full combat gear regardless of the situation given according to Chuck) and prepared to jump out of the back door of the 727.
When the 727 begins descending, team gets the signal to jump, they all jump out of the 727, descending towards the ground not opening parachutes. At a certain height, the team slowly open their parachutes while for Chuck however, the situation is grave. He cannot open his parachute for a particular reason and now the ground is approaching closely. As he passes his team falling towards the ground, Chuck makes a quick decision in thirty seconds and uses an emergency cord to open his reserve chute which it successfully opens; at the cost of losing two of his fingernails from ripping at the chord. He lands on the ground near Demonstration Beach and is knocked out, but he slowly gets up and laughs off his situation.
Chuck then goes to tell about his life in the beginning. He was born in Boston, Massachusetts and was the son of Charles Pfarrer, a US Navy officer, and Joan Marie a nurse, and was a brother. Chuck was baptized as a Roman Catholic, saying, 'Although my family is not the religious type, we still ate fish sticks on Fridays. I came to accept the Saint's and teachings in my early life '. The family moved around to many places including Rhode Island, Hawaii, and Mississippi. When he was 12, the family moves down to Biloxi, Mississippi and Chuck's father leaves them for deployment in Vietnam. While Chuck's father was participating in the Vietnam War, the family home in Biloxi is destroyed by Hurricane Camille, thus making Chuck angry at God for the destruction and giving up his religious faith.
Sometime later, his father comes home and the family moves to Rhode Island where Chuck begins to secretly skipping school to go surfing (he actually began doing the sport when the family was in Hawaii). He describes how he was passionate about the sport, adopting the 'surfer dude' look, how rebellious he became unknowingly to his family, and how he skipped school just to go surfing (he would head directly to the beach to go surfing, and as the school bus came home, he made an excuse to his that he took a shower during PE). Eventually his parents found out about his exploits when the school dean called them to say that Chuck had low grades in his school. Chuck's father soon gives him a choice of which military school to go to, hoping to discipline his son. Chuck chooses to go to Staunton Military Academy not knowing that he did because he was bored. He had chosen the toughest military academy at that time to attend.
Arriving at the Academy, Chuck is then bullied by various cadets who call him a hippie and other derogative terms due to his surfing looks. He is forced to get rid of it to adapt to the discipline of the Academy. Although Chuck does not get in much depth of his life at Staunton, he describes the general life there. He describes how the rigorous lifestyle made him more organized and disciplined, but he also describes fellow cadets there. Chuck mentions that his fellow cadets were bastards of Hollywood stars, sons dictators, senators, juvenile delinquents, and Fortune 500 CEO's all whom had a diverse skill. Chuck talks about how this core group taught him skills that would prove useful later on in his SEAL career; he learned how to pick locks of car doors, how to unofficially leave the Academy grounds without permission to go to town, and how to hide contraband. He graduates from the Academy with a scholarship offer from
Annapolis but rejects it to go attend CSU Northridge, disappointing his father.
At CSU Northridge, Chuck studies to major in psychology managing his time well, regularly earning high grades, hoping one day to become a psychologist. There he meets his first girlfriend and they both travel to England to studyat the University of Bath. It is there where his relationship falls apart and Chuck returns to California to become an intern at an unknown psychology. He realizes how 'boring life was' and finds a sudden desire to becomea Navy SEAL. One day, he walks into a Naval Recruiting office and says to the recruiter that he wants to become a Navy SEAL, not before abruptly quitting his job at the psychology office.
The recruiter then questions how he knew what the SEAL's were (this was before the SEAL's were known in the media) and Chuck describes how his father knew them in Vietnam when he was there. The recruiter declines him a slot to Chuck's disappointment but Chuck strikes him a deal: if he can get a slot, he will have to attend Officer Candidate School (OCS) before getting to attend BUD/S, if he DOR's (drop on request) or washed out, then he would become a Green Beret. The recruiter agrees and Chuck heads back to Rhode Island to prepare for OCS. He sees his ex-girlfriend for the last time before shipping out to attend the school. After a couple of months in OCS, he graduates commissioned as a Lieutenant. 
Right after OCS, Chuck heads to Coronado, California to prepare for BUD/S. He is given a slot in Class 114 where there is little time to prepare for BUD/S (during and in the early post Vietnam era, there was no Indoctration period). Class 114 begins its first day by getting hammered by the instructors, almost all who were Vietnam War veterans. Again, Chuck just describes the general life there, he describes the physical training the class has to do, to the numerous men who drop out, to how the instructors punish or simply goof off with the students to test their minds. He goes through Hell Week with the class, and amazingly no one drops out during the entire week earning it, a 'No Bell' prize when they would graduate. He then describes the post Hell Week atmosphere, from learning the basics of land warfare, to combat diving physics when it was still in its early stages. Chuck survives the rigors of BUD/S and graduates with his classmates who all are honored by the instructors as a class that cannot quit.
After BUD/S, Chuck goes to Fort Benning, Georgia to attend the Army Airborne School to earn basic wings. He is met by a United States Marine Corps officer in charge of Navy students attending this school, who was not amused nor impressed by BUD/S graduates who attended the school (The reason why BUD/S graduates pull pranks on the Airborne School staff was because they wanted to provoke the instructors into punishing them, often which BUD/S graduates treat as a joke after spending at least six months in Coronado begin hammered by their own instructors with more vigorous PT). Chuck describes the various pranks the BUD/S graduates all did there to poke fun of the instructors; they climbed up jump towers to hang 'BEAT ARMY' banners there, they took spray paint and tagged Army officers cars and parking lots with 'GAY AND PROUD' and 'HANDICAP FOR HIRE'. The Marine officer said if he did any kinds of these pranks with other BUD/S graduates, he would instantly be transferred to the regular fleet which Chuck takes somewhat seriously. Sort of.
While at Airborne School, Chuck met up with fellow BUD/S students to exercise more than anyone else there just for show and to keep up shape and of course, pull pranks. On the final day, when Chuck was on a C-130 for a graduation jump, his two Class 114 friends distract an Army instructor to steal his hat and jump before getting caught. Chuck gets in trouble at the drop zone but fortunately earns his Airborne wings given by an Army instructor who disliked the BUD/S graduates along with his friends who still have the hat. He is becoming closer to becoming a SEAL at that point. At the same time, Chuck receives orders to report to SEAL Team Four at Virginia Beach.
Chuck arrives at Virginia Beach to begin his Advanced Operater Training with SEAL Team 4 before he can officially become a Navy SEAL. The team welcomes him by having a couple of enlisted members dunk him in a water tank before sending him off to gather his new gear. He is designated as Operator 156, for easy recognition by the team cadre that looks after the team. Chuck begins to adapt to his new team, meeting up with a friend and officer who arrived earlier, Frank Giffland, and a friend from Class 114 who have already become SEALs. He begins qualifying for his Naval Wings which every SEAL is required to make ten jumps. After his final qualifying jump, Chuck is rewarded this unceremoniously by a Vietnam vet, Master Chief Petty Officer Mike Boynton, whom he greatly respects due to how he covered his office work so that Chuck would be able to participate in team routines.
Chuck also begins to train with another Vietnam veteran named Chief Petty Officer John Jaeger who trains new officers. John for some particular reason, dislikes Chuck in the beginning; calling him derogative humor names whenever he screws up. Eventually, Chuck respects John for his way of teaching him on how to be a leader and being a role model on how to survive in the wilderness. Chuck also comments on how the team liked John for his diverse background; he was rumored to be born in a Nazi generic experiment, he was a hard core smoker who smoked after finishing a swim or any exercise, he was an M-60 Machine Gun gunner in Vietnam, and loved using the phrase, 'or so after each sentence he said. This makes Chuck a little more comfortable with the Team.
As the months go by, Chuck learns the essential skills of being a SEAL operator along with other candidates. He learns how to use C-4 in different ways, he learns how to avoid bloodhounds, Russian tactics, how to handle various enemy weapons, and other skills that SEAL's need to learn. Chuck says that while the newcomers are learning all of this, they are being followed by cadre members known as 'Lane Graders' who attach themselves to the group. TheLane Graders made sure that a procedure was done right and that no team member lied during a debriefing. They were also there to supervise on the process on becoming SEALs by checking on how the newcomers work as team and as individuals. But if the candidates did not abide by this, they were gone.
Near the end of this process, Chuck and other members are sent off to participate in Robin Sage as the OPFOR. The purpose of the SEAL presence was to intentionally not allow any Green Beret candidate to do anything right bydoing direct action missions against them and their Pinelander allies. The SEAL team was to do everything to a high standard, otherwise they risk losing their Operator certifications for not being able to win/screwing up. Chuck is in charge of a team who's objective is to find a Green Beret camp, and destroy it. The team is dropped off in the woods and told to meet a Chieu Hoi informat.
Chuck is first skeptical about the informant thinking it was a setup, but his already qualified enlisted man 'Baby Zee' convinces him to meet the informant. The informant is a military police who is playing the role of a Pinelanderin Robin Sage who tells Chuck on where to find the camp. Unfortunately for Chuck's team, the informant cannot read a map, so Chuck had to use his training to figure out where the camp is. Fortunately, the team discovers the campwhen its inhabitants slaughter a live pig for dinner. Chuck waits until dusk as he prepares to attack the camp.
He has one boat crew (a team) go on one side of the camp to flank the camp, while he had his team move close to the camp from there they were to suppress fire on the camp. Chuck waits for the Green Berets and their patrol to leavethe camp with four others before he orders to fire. His team fires first, confusing the Pinelanders and Green Berets, making Chuck order the other boat crew to add in additional fire. Chuck's team then charges into the camp, 'kill' the Pinelanders (the Green Berets fled) and loots it before requesting for a helicopter extraction. The mission was a complete success.
Sometime later, Chuck is given his first real world assignment to prove that he's worthy of receiving the Naval Special Warfare Badge. He was not getting a mission that he liked at all; observing the US Navy test fire a Trident missile, the recover its rocket engine when it detaches. Chuck and a friend head down to Florida to watch the Navy test fire it. As they prepared to recover the rocket engine however, Soviet trawlers observing also head towards the engine to attempt to retrieve it. Chuck is left with no choice, but to destroy the engine to not let it fall into Soviet hands.
He and his friend jump from the helicopter with C-4 explosives which they wrapped around the rocket, and extracted before it blew up. The rocket is destroyed, and the Soviets failed in retrieving the rocket. Chuck is considered okay by the team and his finally given the Trident. At last he was a Navy SEAL.
As an official member of SEAL Team Four now, Chuck gets into the routine of the regular SEAL life. Besides spending numerous hours training on the base or at Fort AP Hill, the team is deployed at some point overseas with theregular Navy in which Chuck still is unspecific in (these deployments are not classified yet). On the non combat side of life, the Team often frequented a bar in Virginia Beach that has been inhabited by the UDT and the first SEAL's over the years. Chuck also dates a number of women during this time. He first dates a nurse, then a Naval O-1, and many others, but was not successful in getting a long term relationship.
As the years go by, Chuck gets command of his own platoon in the team. He remains friends with Frank Giffland who he is influenced by, while befriending others in his new platoon. One of theseis a Navy Corpsman named Doc, who is a Vietnam veteran. The platoon heads down to the Panama Canal to participate in a joint military exercise with the Panamanian Defense Forces withmany SEAL's having a skeptical thought on them. Chuck reveals that some of the Panamanians were the soldiers waiting to kill SEAL's years later during Operation Nifty Package. During this exercise, the joint team successfully raid the Gatun Locks and other facilities surrounding the canal. The final exercise which consisted only of SEAL's including one of Chuck's AOT instructor, John Jaeger, is to simulate a takeover and sinking of a US Navy ship.
For obvious reasons, Chuck is vague in the description of the takeover of the ship, but concludes that the exercise was a successful task for the SEAL's participating and it creates a friendship between John and Chuck. Some days later, Chuck and John's platoon flights home are delayed so both men let their teams head to bars in town. Chuck and John decide to follow some of them and strip off their insignia rates to go into the enlisted bar. There they find tension building up between members of Force Recon, Green Berets, and SEAL's who are ready to beat each other up. John finally ends the tension when he attracts all the attention to himself and gets a tall Green Beret to look after the men while he went to the bathroom. This ends the tension between all the special forces men in the enlisted bar.
Home for the New Year, Chuck sends his platoon to their own homes and families to celebrate the New Year while staying back to keep watch over the team's base. Finding that there was really nothing else to do, Chuck heads off to a party that he is invited to by a friend who works closely with the SEAL's (he is a Nightstalker). At the party, he meets Margot, a woman from Buffalo, New York who is a mutual friend. They soon quickly leave the party and head to Margot's house. Chuck waits for Margot when she appears to him nude and they have sex. This begins hisfirst long term relationship with Margot.
Some time later, Chuck and Frank are given notices by the command to do a special task. One of them are to do a hydrographic recon on a beach near Puerto Leimpra, Honduras for a Naval force to land there. Chuck and Frank at first head down to Honduras do a personal recon themselves with a CIA agent of the area. They both find a suitable beach to recon before heading hometo prepare to return. Frank decides to take the platoon to AP Hill for initial combat testing while Chuck is left with the task of the recon. 
He picks four others to do the task with him; 'Surfer' Dave, Stan, Tim, and Bubba. Once he does, the group is put on isolation while the rest of the platoon head up to AP Hill. The next day, the groupis flown over the USS Fairfax and free fall to the ocean before meeting up with the ship. Onboard, the captain and Chuck discuss the recon and Chuck goes over all the details with the groupbefore the mission begins. The Fairfax goes into commercial shipping traffic before giving Chuck's team the signal to release their Zodiac boat into the sea. The group heads towards Honduras to begin their recon.
Chuck's boat encounters big waves while heading into the surf zone near the bay where the beach was located. Thanks to Chuck's knowledge of surfing, they make it safely into the bay. Putting a rendevousmarker into the bay, the team puts their boat on shore, then splits to conduct a hydrographic recon of the beach. As soon as they finish, they head to the boat to go to the rendevous point they set up. But themarker is mysteriously missing when the team gets there, alerting Chuck. They soon discover a Nicaraguan patrol boat that had entered the bay founded the marker, and were now looking for the SEAL team inside the bay.
The team, not wanting to be discovered, quietly moves toward a fishing pier to hide under it. Before they could, they awaken two natives who live on the pier. Tim attempts to speak Spanish to them but to no avail, but Chuck discovers that they spoke French. He explains that the natives cannot snitch the team to the patrolboat in which they obey. Thanking them when they did not, Chuck gives one of the natives his knife before moving the boat out.
Deciding to stall the patrol boat which was close but not alerted yet, Chuck ties glowsticks together andhooks them to a tree. While the patrol boat opens fire on the glowsticks, the team move out of the bay tohead towards the surf zone. As they rode a wave, they are shocked to see that the patrol boat follows out ofthe bay too. Fortunately for the team, the surf stalls the patrol boat, and is broached there as the team head out into the ocean. After a deadly game of hide and seek, the team finds the Fairfax. 
Back on the boat after numerous hours in the sea, the team debriefs on what they found and the incident with the Nicaraguan boat that was looking for them. It was later revealed that a Navy personnal had betrayed them by giving codes to the Soviet's who then relayed the information to the Nicaraguans. John Walker had known about this operation, thus creating the incidentfor Chuck's team.
At a bar in Puerto Leimpara, Chuck receives news from his commanding officer that his platoon was to be shipped to a new battle front.
Breaks the news to the rest of the men in the squad that are with him. They were going to Lebanon. 

Willy Roy (born February 8, 1943 in Treuberg, Germany) is a retired U.S. soccer forward and coach. He played for several teams in the National Professional Soccer League and the North American Soccer League in the 1960s and 1970s, as well as the United States national team from 1965 to 1973. He is a member of the National Soccer Hall of Fame.
When Roy was six, his family moved to the United States from Germany, settling in Chicago. After attending Reavis High School in what is now Burbank, Illinois, he began playing semi-pro soccer in the Chicago area. In 1964, he joined Hansa of the National Soccer League of Chicago. In 1966, Hansa won the Peter J. Peel Challenge Cup as the Illinois State Champion. The year prior, the team lost to the New York Ukrainians in the U.S. Open Cup.
1966 saw a series of events which had a major impact on Roy's future career. Three separate groups decided to form a professional league in the U.S. Through various negotiations, two of the groups merged to form the National Professional Soccer League (NPSL). While the USSF and FIFA refused to recognize the NPSL, it gained a television contract with CBS, thereby guaranteeing some element of financial stability.
Up to this point, Roy played almost exclusively with local Chicago minor league teams and the U.S. national team. In 1967, he joined the newly established Chicago Spurs of the NPSL. At the time, the Roy was one of only eight U.S. citizens in the league. One of the other U.S. citizens, Bob Gansler, was later a teammate with Roy on the national team and became the future coach of the national team. In his first year with the Spurs, Roy scored 17 goals, assisted 5 others, making him the league's second leading scorer. This led to his selection to Rookie of the Year and NPSL All Star team.
Once again, external soccer events impacted Roy's career. The NPSL merged with the United Soccer Association in December 1967 to form the North American Soccer League. That year, the Spurs also moved to Kansas City. Roy moved with the team and spent one season there. Roy experienced a sophomore slump in 1968, playing 15 games, scoring 6 goals and assisting on 4 others. However, the team played well, losing to the Atlanta Chiefs in the playoff semifinals.
Roy left the Kansas City Spurs in 1971 to join the Saint Louis Stars of the North American Soccer League (NASL) in 1971. In his three seasons with the Stars, he scored 18 goals and assisted on 16 others. In 1972, the team made it to the NASL championship game, losing to the New York Cosmos 2-1.
After retiring from the national team, Roy continued to play professionally for a few more years. In 1975, he moved to his last team, the expansion Chicago Sting. He would play a single season with the Sting, statistically the worst of his career. He scored no goals and made 3 assists in 14 games. He retired from playing at the end of the season.
In 1965, Roy made his debut with the United States national team in a 1966 FIFA World Cup qualification match against Mexico in Mexico City, a 0-2 loss. He earned his second cap nine days later in a tie with Honduras which ended the U.S. attempt to qualify for the 1966 World Cup.
Roy enjoyed relative success with the national team in 1968. He played eight games, scoring six goals. In those eight games, the national team went 4-3-1. More significantly, four of those games were qualifying matches for the 1970 FIFA World Cup. In those three games, the U.S. went 3-1 with Roy scoring 3 goals. The next year, he played only a single game with the national team, a 2-0 loss to Haiti. That game, combined with a second loss to Haiti a month later spelled the end to yet another U.S. attempt to qualify for a World Cup. Roy would not play for the national team again until it began playing qualification games for the 1974 World Cup.
In 1972, Roy played four games with the national team, all 1974 World Cup qualifying matches. The U.S. went 0-3-1, failing to reach yet another World Cup. Despite the team's dismal showing, Roy scored in three consecutive games, giving him a record six goals in World Cup qualifying matches. The next player to score in three consecutive matches did not come until Cobi Jones did it in 2000. Roy’s record of six goals in world cup qualifying matches lasted until Earnie Stewart scored his seventh qualifying goal in 2001.
Roy played five more games with the national team, all in 1973. That year, he scored once, ending his national team career with 20 games and 10 goals, one of the best scoring rates by any national team member over a sustained career.
The Major Indoor Soccer League had commenced operations in 1978, and it proved its success in its first two years of operation as it gained teams and the NASL lost teams to financial failure. NASL attempted to piggyback on the MISL success in 1981 by playing an indoor season during the winter of 1981–1982 following its 1981 outdoor season.
Roy's Sting did not do well in its first season indoors. Things improved during the 1982–1983 indoor season. While the NASL did not hold an indoor season the next winter, the Sting played in the MISL where it finished third in the Eastern Division. Roy and the Sting improved again during the 1983–1984 indoor season, again with the NASL. They finished second in the standings and lost to the New York Cosmos in the playoff semifinals.
In 1976, upon retiring from playing, Roy became an assistant coach for Chicago Sting. He spent two seasons in this position, before moving up to head coach in 1979. In 1981, Roy coached the Sting to a 23-9 record and a victory in the Soccer Bowl (the NASL championship game) and earned NASL Coach of the Year honors.
The summer of 1984 saw Roy coach the Sting to its second NASL outdoor title. This would also be the last NASL championship as the league folded that fall. With the demise of the NASL, the Sting became a full time member of the MISL.
Roy coached the Sting for two more seasons. The team lost to the Cleveland Force in the 1985 quarterfinals but missed the playoffs in 1986, finishing with a 23-25 record. Roy ending his tenure with the Sting on December 23, 1986.
During his time with the Sting, Roy did more than win two championships. He had an impact which went beyond the team when he coached the former Dutch National Team Head Coach Dick Advocaat and United States women's national soccer team Greg Ryan. Ryan later credited Roy with being a strong influence on his development as a player and coach. Ryan said, “The thing that defined Willy was, he was one of the most intense competitors as a player and that carried over to his coaching. He was so intense and so determined that he brought that quality out in his players. If he mentioned people who went on to bigger and better things, it was because they learned to work so hard and give so much.”
In 1985, Roy became the men's soccer coach at Northern Illinois University. In 1990, the Huskies had the Mid-Continent Conference's best record and Roy was selected as the Mid-Con's Coach of the Year.
On February 18, 2003, the school announced that it was not renewing Roy's contract after the Huskies had three consecutive losing seasons. He finished his career coaching the team with a 142-131-22 record and two conference championships. During his time with the team, it was known for the high academic standards Roy set for his players. Although his last season with the team saw a dismal 4-13-1, the Huskies ranked in the Division-I Academic top 20.
In 1989, Roy was elected to the National Soccer Hall of Fame.
He currently owns and runs the Willy Roy Soccer Dome, an indoor soccer arena in Chicago, and the Dolton Bowl, a bowling alley next door. Now in his sixties, he continues to play in an over-30 league at the Soccer Dome.
In 1979, he wrote the book Coaching Winning Soccer.
