James David Caldwell, Jr., or Buddy Caldwell (born May 20, 1946), is the Democratic attorney general of the U.S. state of Louisiana. Prior to serving as attorney general, Caldwell was the district attorney for Madison, East Carroll, and Tensas parishes from 1979 to 2008. Caldwell, who resides in Tallulah, the seat of Madison Parish, is also an entertainer, guitarist, and songwriter known for his impersonation of Elvis Presley.
In 2007, Caldwell ran for attorney general against the incumbent, fellow Democrat Charles F. Foti, Jr., of New Orleans, and Republican Royal Alexander (born 1966), an attorney from Shreveport and a former congressional aide to U.S. Representative Rodney Alexander (no relation) of Jackson Parish. Caldwell secured high-profile endorsements from the Louisiana Sheriffs' Association and the Louisiana Federation of Teachers, two longtime Democratic-leaning interest groups. Most of the state's newspapers, including the Shreveport Times in Alexander's Shreveport, endorsed Caldwell. Foti, a former Orleans Parish criminal sheriff, had lost favor with voters over controversies involving the prosecution of medical professionals in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.
Shortly before the three-candidate primary for attorney general on October 20, 2007, it was revealed that Caldwell's son, David Caldwell, was employed by former Attorney General Foti. Caldwell was himself a Foti supporter in the 2003 election.. Nevertheless, Caldwell led the primary with 434,507 votes (36 percent). Alexander ran second with 395,498 (32 percent). Foti polled 389,300 votes (also 32 percent) but trailed Alexander and was hence eliminated from the general election competition. 
In the general election, Caldwell defeated Alexander by a 2-1 margin. Caldwell received 477,574 votes (67 percent) to Alexander's 239,485 (33 percent). Just hours prior to the general election, Alexander had filed and then withdrew from a suit against Caldwell on grounds that the Democrat had "lied" about Alexander in television advertising. Alexander said that he had to drop the suit because Louisiana law permits lying as a form of free expression in political campaigns. 
Caldwell was the fourth of seven children born to J.D. Caldwell, Sr. (1910-1987), and the former Genevieve Minsky (1916-2001) in tiny Columbia, the seat of Caldwell Parish, and the home of former Governor John McKeithen and McKeithen's son, the late Louisiana Secretary of State W. Fox McKeithen, a Caldwell family friend. The Caldwells moved permanently to rural Madison Parish in 1949. J.D. Caldwell obtained a master's degree in music from Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge and sang earlier with the Metropolitan Opera in New York City. After moving to Tallulah, the senior Caldwell became a farmer and clothing merchant. Mrs. Caldwell, a registered nurse, held a degree from Touro Infirmary of New Orleans. She was a public health nurse and later a Madison Parish school health nurse for thirty years. 
Buddy Caldwell is not related to the late Louisiana Second Judicial District Court Judge David T. Caldwell of Jonesboro or to that Judge Caldwell's son, James David "Jimmy" Caldwell (born ca. 1949), a practicing attorney in Shreveport.
Caldwell graduated from Tallulah High School in 1964 when it was still segregated, albeit certain Caldwell family members continued supporting white flight, which has been denoted by the Supreme Court when found in other states to be segregating and discriminatory. 
Caldwell lettered in basketball, football, and track. He worked in his mother's family drug store during his teen years. Caldwell also played semi-professional baseball in North Louisiana while he was still in high school, as did several other Louisiana politicians, including the late Education Superintendent Bill Dodd and former State Representatives Lantz Womack of Winnsboro, the seat of Franklin Parish, and L.D. "Buddy" Napper of Ruston, the seat of Lincoln Parish. 
Caldwell earned his bachelor of arts degree in psychology, with a minor in history, from Tulane University in New Orleans, where he also played football and ran track. In 1973, he received his law degree from the Tulane University Law School and thereafter established his solo law practice in Tallulah, which he maintained until becoming district attorney six years later.
Caldwell was first elected district attorney of the small Sixth Judicial District on September 16, 1978, when he was thirty-two. He assumed the office, which is located in Tallulah, on January 1, 1979. From 1983-1996, Caldwell served on the board of directors of the Louisiana District Attorney's Association. While district attorney, he personally tried felony cases in his district. Suspects rarely won acquittal when Caldwell was the prosecutor. Critics, however, note that Caldwell maintained a high conviction rate by not prosecuting the "hard" cases. Caldwell also claimed the highest per capita collection rate for back child support in the state.
The three-parish district, the most northeastern in the state, is heavily Democratic and includes a high concentration of African American voters. On his website, Caldwell contended that he established "positive working relationships throughout Louisiana with Sheriffs, other District Attorneys, Mayors, Parish and Town Councils, School Boards, Justices of the Peace, Constables, and other local officials. I also have experience working with federal agencies like the United States Justice Department, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Drug Enforcement Administration, and the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms agency."
Caldwell won his third term as district attorney in 1990, when in a low-turnout election he defeated fellow Democrat Samuel Thomas, 6,711 (61 percent) to 4,277 (39 percent). He was unopposed in 1996. Caldwell secured a fifth term in 2002, when he defeated fellow Democrat Raymond "Ray" Cannon, 4,987 (56 percent) to 3,931 (44 percent) in another low-turnout election.
While District Attorney for multiple parishes, Caldwell repeatedly refused to investigate and indict family members. In repeated audit findings from the Louisiana Board of Ethics and Legislative Auditors, Carolyn and Ray Caldwell, as well as their children, other family members, and friends, were discovered to be inappropriately profiting from Madison's Office of Clerk of Court finances. 
Caldwell and his fourth wife, Pat M. Caldwell, have a combined seven grown children and six grandchildren. In December 1994, Caldwell married for the third time in Las Vegas. A few months later, he was served with divorce papers by his new wife. Four days after that, she was terminated as the "confidential assistant" to Louisiana Secretary of State Fox McKeithen. Caldwell testified that he arranged for his third wife's hiring with the help of an employee of the attorney general's office, which in other states could be known as nepotism. "I've known Fox ever since we were children," Caldwell said. The third Mrs. Caldwell testified that McKeithen called her into his office on May 12, 1995, and they discussed her divorce case: "I was terminated from my job. I was upset. I was crying. I have a child to support. I could not survive without a job." Amid the divorce proceedings, Caldwell dropped a bid for lieutenant governor that year on the grounds that his position as district attorney would not allow him time to campaign. The lieutenant governorship was instead won by eventual Louisiana Governor Kathleen Babineaux Blanco of Lafayette.
Former Legislative Auditor Dan Kyle of Baton Rouge, an unsuccessful Republican candidate for insurance commissioner in 2003, was a leading critic of Caldwell's attorney general candidacy. Kyle reported that in 1997 Caldwell "spent $1,529 in D.A. office funds to pay for personal items, including clothing and golfing expenses." The expenses included air fare to Montana and golf fees in Alabama.
According to The Advocate, Kyle claimed that Caldwell tried "to quash release of parts of the audit . . . and used foul language and threats in an unsuccessful attempt to block the audit." Then, Kyle accused Caldwell of having blamed his own secretary for the questionable spending: "Caldwell also said the spending problem in the 1997 audit was a mistake by his secretary, adding that he personally brought it to the auditor's attention." In Committee Room 3,during a Legislation probe, Mr. Caldwell was testified against by the auditor who stated that Mr. Caldwell said, "Some very racist remarks, because the police jury we were issuing the audit on were all minorities, he told me I just needed a white man to issue an audit on. I said'no' the findings are the same. You've done the same thing these people have done and justice is justice. And, I have to issue both reports. And, if you'll look at them, they both have the same data on them." The auditor stated that he was later told Mr. Caldwell "is a loose cannon... out to get you. He is dangerous. You need protection." 
Three years later, Caldwell accused Kyle's investigators of "an array of questionable activities ranging from improperly bugging conversations to having sex with witnesses in audit investigations" in testimony before the Legislative Audit Advisory Council. Caldwell "told the council . . . that state auditors working in north Louisiana had suppressed evidence, secretly tape-recorded interviews with witnesses, and compromised the credibility of witnesses in possible criminal investigations. Caldwell later told reporters he also knew of instances of an auditor in Kyle's office having sexual relations with people being audited." Caldwell gave no details, according to Kyle.
Caldwell subpoenaed two of Kyle's investigators before a grand jury in Tallulah. Kyle later claimed that Caldwell was trying to indict Kyle or the investigators. According to the New Orleans Times-Picayune, Caldwell said after the Legislative Audit Advisory Council meeting that he "might reopen a grand jury investigation of Kyle's office." 
Caldwell also came under fire for his role as a self-appointed special prosecutor in a case against St. Tammany Parish Judge Patricia Hedges. He filed charges of extortion, public bribery, and malfeasance against the judge, only to drop all claims without explanation on the premise that he could not have won a conviction without a jury trial.
As an entertainer and singer, Caldwell has performed before state, regional, and national groups, particularly teachers, coaches, and school administrators in the southeastern United States. He has also entertained Commissioners of Agriculture, Clerks of Court, fellow District Attorneys, Justices of the Peace, the Louisiana Police Jury county commission in most states Association, Relay for Life, and the United Way. Like his father, he can also sing opera.
1946 births, Living people, American male singers, District attorneys, Louisiana lawyers, Louisiana Democrats, Louisiana Attorneys General, American songwriters, Tulane Green Wave football players, Tulane University alumni, Tulane University Law School alumni, 