
Warrior Soul, The Memoir of a Navy SEAL, Chuck Pfarrer, Random House, 2004. ISBN 0-89141-863-6. Warrior Soul is a memoir of former Navy SEAL Chuck Pfarrer from the start of his career to his last mission. He writes in an honest way although some areas are not specific in which he cites that he cannot reveal that much due to continued secrecy. This memoir is praised by the New York Times bookseller as the best memoir of a former SEAL.
Chuck Pfarrer writes about his career beginning with a story of his last mission with SEAL Team 6. Disguised as regular people, the team meets up at Norfolk International Airport to prepare to board an American Airlines Boeing 727 for a flight to a unknown destination. It is actually a test mission for military air traffic control in the Norfolk, Virginia area to see if they can detect a free falling SEAL team, and the American Airlines plane is actually being flown by a SEAL that's certified in flying aircraft. The 727 takes off and flies towards Florida as a disguised as any regular flight when it suddenly banks back to Norfolk, switches its identity to a military aircraft, and request the Norfolk Air Traffic Control Tower to do a touch- and- go approach to the airport. While this is happening, Chuck and his team are gearing up with all of their gear (SEAL's practiced in full combat gear regardless of the situation given according to Chuck) and prepared to jump out of the back door of the 727.
When the 727 begins descending, team gets the signal to jump, they all jump out of the 727, descending towards the ground not opening parachutes. At a certain height, the team slowly open their parachutes while for Chuck however, the situation is grave. He cannot open his parachute for a particular reason and now the ground is approaching closely. As he passes his team falling towards the ground, Chuck makes a quick decision in thirty seconds and uses an emergency cord to open his reserve chute which it successfully opens; at the cost of losing two of his fingernails from ripping at the chord. He lands on the ground near Demonstration Beach and is knocked out, but he slowly gets up and laughs off his situation.
Chuck then goes to tell about his life in the beginning. He was born in Boston, Massachusetts and was the son of Charles Pfarrer, a US Navy officer, and Joan Marie a nurse, and was a brother. Chuck was baptized as a Roman Catholic, saying, 'Although my family is not the religious type, we still ate fish sticks on Fridays. I came to accept the Saint's and teachings in my early life '. The family moved around to many places including Rhode Island, Hawaii, and Mississippi. When he was 12, the family moves down to Biloxi, Mississippi and Chuck's father leaves them for deployment in Vietnam. While Chuck's father was participating in the Vietnam War, the family home in Biloxi is destroyed by Hurricane Camille, thus making Chuck angry at God for the destruction and giving up his religious faith.
Sometime later, his father comes home and the family moves to Rhode Island where Chuck begins to secretly skipping school to go surfing (he actually began doing the sport when the family was in Hawaii). He describes how he was passionate about the sport, adopting the 'surfer dude' look, how rebellious he became unknowingly to his family, and how he skipped school just to go surfing (he would head directly to the beach to go surfing, and as the school bus came home, he made an excuse to his that he took a shower during PE). Eventually his parents found out about his exploits when the school dean called them to say that Chuck had low grades in his school. Chuck's father soon gives him a choice of which military school to go to, hoping to discipline his son. Chuck chooses to go to Staunton Military Academy not knowing that he did because he was bored. He had chosen the toughest military academy at that time to attend.
Arriving at the Academy, Chuck is then bullied by various cadets who call him a hippie and other derogative terms due to his surfing looks. He is forced to get rid of it to adapt to the discipline of the Academy. Although Chuck does not get in much depth of his life at Staunton, he describes the general life there. He describes how the rigorous lifestyle made him more organized and disciplined, but he also describes fellow cadets there. Chuck mentions that his fellow cadets were bastards of Hollywood stars, sons dictators, senators, juvenile delinquents, and Fortune 500 CEO's all whom had a diverse skill. Chuck talks about how this core group taught him skills that would prove useful later on in his SEAL career; he learned how to pick locks of car doors, how to unofficially leave the Academy grounds without permission to go to town, and how to hide contraband. He graduates from the Academy with a scholarship offer fromAnnapolis but rejects it to go attend CSU Northridge, disappointing his father.
At CSU Northridge, Chuck studies to major in psychology managing his time well, regularly earning high grades, hoping one day to become a psychologist. There he meets his first girlfriend and they both travel to England to studyat the University of Bath. It is there where his relationship falls apart and Chuck returns to California to become an intern at an unknown psychology. He realizes how 'boring life was' and finds a sudden desire to becomea Navy SEAL. One day, he walks into a Naval Recruiting office and says to the recruiter that he wants to become a Navy SEAL, not before abruptly quitting his job at the psychology office.
The recruiter then questions how he knew what the SEAL's were (this was before the SEAL's were known in the media) and Chuck describes how his father knew them in Vietnam when he was there. The recruiter declines him a slot toChuck's disappointment but Chuck strikes him a deal: if he can get a slot, he will have to attend Officer Candidate School (OCS) before getting to attend BUD/S, if he DOR's (drop on request) or washed out, then he would become a Green Beret. The recruiter agrees and Chuck heads back to Rhode Island to prepare for OCS. He sees his ex-girlfriend for the last time before shipping out to attend the school. After a couple of months in OCS, he graduates commissioned as a Lieutenant. 
Right after OCS, Chuck heads to Coronado, California to prepare for BUD/S. He is given a slot in Class 114 where there is little time to prepare for BUD/S (during and in the early post Vietnam era, there was no Indoctration period). Class 114 begins its first day by getting hammered by the instructors, almost all who were Vietnam War veterans. Again, Chuck just describes the general life there, he describes the physical training the class has to do, to the numerous men who drop out, to how the instructors punish or simply goof off with the students to test their minds. He goes through Hell Week with the class, and amazingly no one drops out during the entire week earning it, a 'No Bell' prize when they would graduate. He then describes the post Hell Week atmosphere, from learning the basics of land warfare, to combat diving physics when it was still in its early stages. Chuck survives the rigors of BUD/S and graduates with his classmates who all are honored by the instructors as a class that cannot quit.
After BUD/S, Chuck goes to Fort Benning, Georgia to attend the Army Airborne School to earn basic wings. He is met by a United States Marine Corps officer in charge of Navy students attending this school, who was not amused nor impressed by BUD/S graduates who attended the school (The reason why BUD/S graduates pull pranks on the Airborne School staff was because they wanted to provoke the instructors into punishing them, often which BUD/S graduates treat as a joke after spending at least six months in Coronado begin hammered by their own instructors with more vigorous PT). Chuck describes the various pranks the BUD/S graduates all did there to poke fun of the instructors; they climbed up jump towers to hang 'BEAT ARMY' banners there, they took spray paint and tagged Army officers cars and parking lots with 'GAY AND PROUD' and 'HANDICAP FOR HIRE'. The Marine officer said if he did any kinds of these pranks with other BUD/S graduates, he would instantly be transferred to the regular fleet which Chuck takes somewhat seriously. Sort of.
While at Airborne School, Chuck met up with fellow BUD/S students to exercise more than anyone else there just for show and to keep up shape and of course, pull pranks. On the final day, when Chuck was on a C-130 for a graduation jump, his two Class 114 friends distract an Army instructor to steal his hat and jump before getting caught. Chuck gets in trouble at the drop zone but fortunately earns his Airborne wings given by an Army instructor who disliked the BUD/S graduates along with his friends who still have the hat. He is becoming closer to becoming a SEAL at that point. At the same time, Chuck receives orders to report to SEAL Team Four at Virginia Beach.
Chuck arrives at Virginia Beach to begin his Advanced Operater Training with SEAL Team 4 before he can officially become a Navy SEAL. The team welcomes him by having a couple of enlisted members dunk him in a water tank before sending him off to gather his new gear. He is designated as Operator 156, for easy recognition by the team cadre that looks after the team. Chuck begins to adapt to his new team, meeting up with a friend and officer who arrived earlier, Frank Giffland, and a friend from Class 114 who have already become SEALs. He begins qualifying for his Naval Wings which every SEAL is required to make ten jumps. After his final qualifying jump, Chuck is rewarded this unceremoniously by a Vietnam vet, Master Chief Petty Officer Mike Boynton, whom he greatly respects due to how he covered his office work so that Chuck would be able to participate in team routines.
Chuck also begins to train with another Vietnam veteran named Chief Petty Officer John Jaeger who trains new officers. John for some particular reason, dislikes Chuck in the beginning; calling him derogative humor names whenever he screws up. Eventually, Chuck respects John for his way of teaching him on how to be a leader and being a role model on how to survive in the wilderness. Chuck also comments on how the team liked John for his diverse background; he was rumored to be born in a Nazi generic experiment, he was a hard core smoker who smoked after finishing a swim or any exercise, he was an M-60 Machine Gun gunner in Vietnam, and loved using the phrase, 'or so after each sentence he said. This makes Chuck a little more comfortable with the Team.
As the months go by, Chuck learns the essential skills of being a SEAL operator along with other candidates. He learns how to use C-4 in different ways, he learns how to avoid bloodhounds, Russian tactics, how to handle various enemy weapons, and other skills that SEAL's need to learn. Chuck says that while the newcomers are learning all of this, they are being followed by cadre members known as 'Lane Graders' who attach themselves to the group. TheLane Graders made sure that a procedure was done right and that no team member lied during a debriefing. They were also there to supervise on the process on becoming SEALs by checking on how the newcomers work as team and as individuals. But if the candidates did not abide by this, they were gone.
Near the end of this process, Chuck and other members are sent off to participate in Robin Sage as the OPFOR. The purpose of the SEAL presence was to intentionally not allow any Green Beret candidate to do anything right bydoing direct action missions against them and their Pinelander allies. The SEAL team was to do everything to a high standard, otherwise they risk losing their Operator certifications for not being able to win/screwing up. Chuck is in charge of a team who's objective is to find a Green Beret camp, and destroy it. The team is dropped off in the woods and told to meet a Chieu Hoi informat.
Chuck is first skeptical about the informant thinking it was a setup, but his already qualified enlisted man 'Baby Zee' convinces him to meet the informant. The informant is a military police who is playing the role of a Pinelanderin Robin Sage who tells Chuck on where to find the camp. Unfortunately for Chuck's team, the informant cannot read a map, so Chuck had to use his training to figure out where the camp is. Fortunately, the team discovers the campwhen its inhabitants slaughter a live pig for dinner. Chuck waits until dusk as he prepares to attack the camp.
He has one boat crew (a team) go on one side of the camp to flank the camp, while he had his team move close to the camp from there they were to suppress fire on the camp. Chuck waits for the Green Berets and their patrol to leavethe camp with four others before he orders to fire. His team fires first, confusing the Pinelanders and Green Berets, making Chuck order the other boat crew to add in additional fire. Chuck's team then charges into the camp, 'kill' the Pinelanders (the Green Berets fled) and loots it before requesting for a helicopter extraction. The mission was a complete success.
Sometime later, Chuck is given his first real world assignment to prove that he's worthy of receiving the Naval Special Warfare Badge. He was not getting a mission that he liked at all; observing the US Navy test fire a Trident missile, the recover its rocket engine when it detaches. Chuck and a friend head down to Florida to watch the Navy test fire it. As they prepared to recover the rocket engine however, Soviet trawlers observing also head towards the engine to attempt to retrieve it. Chuck is left with no choice, but to destroy the engine to not let it fall into Soviet hands.
He and his friend jump from the helicopter with C-4 explosives which they wrapped around the rocket, and extracted before it blew up. The rocket is destroyed, and the Soviets failed in retrieving the rocket. Chuck is considered okay by the team and his finally given the Trident. At last he was a Navy SEAL.
As an official member of SEAL Team Four now, Chuck gets into the routine of the regular SEAL life. Besides spending numerous hours training on the base or at Fort AP Hill, the team is deployed at some point overseas with theregular Navy in which Chuck still is unspecific in (these deployments are not classified yet). On the non combat side of life, the Team often frequented a bar in Virginia Beach that has been inhabited by the UDT and the first SEAL's over the years. Chuck also dates a number of women during this time. He first dates a nurse, then a Naval O-1, and many others, but was not successful in getting a long term relationship.
As the years go by, Chuck gets command of his own platoon in the team. He remains friends with Frank Giffland who he is influenced by, while befriending others in his new platoon. One of theseis a Navy Corpsman named Doc, who is a Vietnam veteran. The platoon heads down to the Panama Canal to participate in a joint military exercise with the Panamanian Defense Forces withmany SEAL's having a skeptical thought on them. Chuck reveals that some of the Panamanians were the soldiers waiting to kill SEAL's years later during Operation Nifty Package. During this exercise, the joint team successfully raid the Gatun Locks and other facilities surrounding the canal. The final exercise which consisted only of SEAL's including one of Chuck's AOT instructor,John Jaeger, is to simulate a takeover and sinking of a US Navy ship.
For obvious reasons, Chuck is vague in the description of the takeover of the ship, but concludes that the exercise was a successful task for the SEAL's participating and it creates a friendship between John and Chuck. Some days later, Chuck and John's platoon flights home are delayed so both men let their teams head to bars in town. Chuck and John decide to follow some of them andstrip off their insignia rates to go into the enlisted bar. There they find tension building up between members of Force Recon, Green Berets, and SEAL's who are ready to beat each other up. John finally ends the tension when he attracts all the attention to himself and gets a tall Green Beret to look after the men while he went to the bathroom. This ends the tension between all the special forces men in the enlisted bar.
Home for the New Year, Chuck sends his platoon to their own homes and families to celebrate the New Year while staying back to keep watch over the team's base. Finding that there was really nothing else to do, Chuck heads off to a party that he is invited to by a friend who works closely with the SEAL's (he is a Nightstalker). At the party, he meets Margot, a woman from Buffalo, New York who is a mutual friend. They soon quickly leave the party and head to Margot's house. Chuck waits for Margot when she appears to him nude and they have sex. This begins hisfirst long term relationship with Margot.
Some time later, Chuck and Frank are given notices by the command to do a special task. One of them are to do a hydrographic recon on a beach near Puerto Leimpra, Honduras for a Naval force to land there. Chuck and Frank at first head down to Honduras do a personal recon themselves with a CIA agent of the area. They both find a suitable beach to recon before heading hometo prepare to return. Frank decides to take the platoon to AP Hill for initial combat testing while Chuck is left with the task of the recon. 
He picks four others to do the task with him; 'Surfer' Dave, Stan, Tim, and Bubba. Once he does, the group is put on isolation while the rest of the platoon head up to AP Hill. The next day, the groupis flown over the USS Fairfax and free fall to the ocean before meeting up with the ship. Onboard, the captain and Chuck discuss the recon and Chuck goes over all the details with the groupbefore the mission begins. The Fairfax goes into commercial shipping traffic before giving Chuck's team the signal to release their Zodiac boat into the sea. The group heads towards Honduras to begin their recon.
Chuck's boat encounters big waves while heading into the surf zone near the bay where the beach was located. Thanks to Chuck's knowledge of surfing, they make it safely into the bay. Putting a rendevousmarker into the bay, the team puts their boat on shore, then splits to conduct a hydrographic recon of the beach. As soon as they finish, they head to the boat to go to the rendevous point they set up. But themarker is mysteriously missing when the team gets there, alerting Chuck. They soon discover a Nicaraguanpatrol boat that had entered the bay founded the marker, and were now looking for the SEAL team inside the bay.
The team, not wanting to be discovered, quietly moves toward a fishing pier to hide under it. Before they could, they awaken two natives who live on the pier. Tim attempts to speak Spanish to them but to no avail, but Chuck discovers that they spoke French. He explains that the natives cannot snitch the team to the patrolboat in which they obey. Thanking them when they did not, Chuck gives one of the natives his knife beforemoving the boat out.
Deciding to stall the patrol boat which was close but not alerted yet, Chuck ties glowsticks together andhooks them to a tree. While the patrol boat opens fire on the glowsticks, the team move out of the bay tohead towards the surf zone. As they rode a wave, they are shocked to see that the patrol boat follows out ofthe bay too. Fortunately for the team, the surf stalls the patrol boat, and is broached there as the teamhead out into the ocean. After a deadly game of hide and seek, the team finds the Fairfax. 
Back on the boat after numerous hours in the sea, the team debriefs on what they found and the incident with the Nicaraguanboat that was looking for them. It was later revealed that a Navy personnal had betrayed them by giving codes to the Soviet's who then relayed the information to the Nicaraguans. John Walker had known about this operation, thus creating the incidentfor Chuck's team.
At a bar in Puerto Leimpara, Chuck receives news from his commanding officer that his platoon was to be shipped to a new battle front.Breaks the news to the rest of the men in the squad that are with him. They were going to Lebanon. 
2004 books, Autobiographical military books, 